Preventing Diabetes Problems

View or Print All Sections
Heart Disease & Stroke
Diabetes can damage blood vessels and lead to heart disease and stroke. You can do a lot to prevent heart disease and stroke by managing your blood glucose, blood pressure, and cholesterol levels; and by not smoking.

Low Blood Glucose (Hypoglycemia)
Hypoglycemia occurs when your blood glucose drops too low. Certain diabetes medicines make low blood glucose more likely. You can prevent hypoglycemia by following your meal plan and balancing your physical activity, food, and medicines. Testing your blood glucose regularly can also help prevent hypoglycemia.

Diabetic Neuropathy
Diabetic neuropathy is nerve damage that can result from diabetes. Different types of nerve damage affect different parts of your body. Managing your diabetes can help prevent nerve damage that affects your feet and limbs, and organs such as your heart.

Kidney Disease
Diabetic kidney disease, also called diabetic nephropathy, is kidney disease caused by diabetes. You can help protect your kidneys by managing your diabetes and meeting your blood pressure goals.

Foot Problems
Diabetes can cause nerve damage and poor blood flow, which can lead to serious foot problems. Common foot problems, such as a callus, can lead to pain or an infection that makes it hard to walk. Get a foot checkup at each visit with your health care team.

Eye Disease
Diabetes can damage your eyes and lead to low vision and blindness. The best way to prevent eye disease is to manage your blood glucose, blood pressure, and cholesterol; and to not smoke. Also, have a dilated eye exam at least once a year.

Gum Disease & Other Dental Problems
Diabetes can lead to problems in your mouth, such as infection, gum disease, or dry mouth. To help keep your mouth healthy, manage your blood glucose, brush your teeth twice a day, see your dentist at least once a year, and don’t smoke.

Sexual & Bladder Problems
Sexual and bladder problems are more common in people with diabetes. Problems like erectile dysfunction, loss of interest in sex, bladder leaks, and retained urine can happen if diabetes damages your blood vessels and nerves. Treatments are available to help control symptoms and restore intimacy.

Depression & Diabetes
Depression NIH external link is common among people with a chronic, or long-term, illness such as diabetes. Depression can be treated so tell your doctor if you feel sad, hopeless, or anxious.

Cancer & Diabetes
Diabetes is linked to some types of cancer External link. Many risk factors for cancer and for diabetes are the same. Not smoking and getting recommended cancer screenings can help prevent cancer.

Dementia & Diabetes
High blood glucose increases the chance of developing dementia NIH external link. Tell your doctor if you are forgetful because dementia can make it hard to manage your diabetes.

Sleep Apnea & Diabetes
People who have sleep apnea NIH external link—when you stop breathing for short periods during sleep—are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes. Sleep apnea also can make diabetes worse. Treatment for sleep apnea can help.Symptoms & Causes of Diabetes
In this section:

What are the symptoms of diabetes?
What causes type 1 diabetes?
What causes type 2 diabetes?
What causes gestational diabetes?
What else can cause diabetes?
Clinical Trials for Symptoms and Causes of Diabetes
What are the symptoms of diabetes?
Common symptoms of diabetes include

increased urination
feeling very thirsty
feeling very hungry, even after you have eaten
blurred vision
fatigue
sores that do not heal
frequent infections, such as urinary tract infections, skin infections NIH external link, or yeast infections NIH external link
There are different types of diabetes. People with any type of diabetes can have these symptoms. Some other symptoms, and how quickly the symptoms develop, depend on the type of diabetes that you have. Talk with your primary health care professional about any symptoms you are having and ask if you should be tested for diabetes. Your primary health care professional may be a doctor, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner.

Type 1 diabetes symptoms
In addition to some of the common diabetes symptoms listed above, people with type 1 diabetes may also have an unexplained weight loss. Most people don’t know they have type 1 diabetes until they develop diabetes symptoms.

Symptoms of type 1 diabetes usually develop quickly, over a few days or weeks. Type 1 diabetes is often diagnosed in children and young adults, but it can begin at any age. Children with type 1 diabetes typically develop symptoms over a short period of time. Common symptoms of type diabetes in children include

having to urinate more often
eating more but losing weight
feeling very thirsty
These symptoms are less common in adults with type 1 diabetes. For some adults, symptoms of type 1 diabetes may develop slowly and seem more like type 2 diabetes. Some adults who develop diabetes may need special tests to find out what type of diabetes they have. Talk with your health care professional about the type of diabetes you may have. They can help you understand its causes and treatments.

Sometimes, people find out they have type 1 diabetes when they have signs and symptoms of a condition called diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) External link. Symptoms of DKA may include

feeling very tired
having trouble breathing
having fruity-smelling breath
fainting from dehydration
having pain in your abdomen, nausea, or vomiting
If you have type 1 diabetes, your body doesn’t have enough insulin to use blood glucose—also called blood sugar—for energy. Your body will begin to use fat as a source of energy instead. This process produces substances called ketones. High levels of ketones can cause DKA, which is a medical emergency that needs to be treated right away.

DKA usually affects people with type 1 diabetes. People with type 2 diabetes may also develop DKA if their body doesn’t produce enough insulin.

Type 2 diabetes symptoms
Symptoms of type 2 diabetes can develop slowly, over several years. Many people with type 2 diabetes have no symptoms, or symptoms can be so mild that people might not even notice them. In addition to the common symptoms of diabetes listed above, people may find out they have type 2 diabetes when they develop symptoms of other health problems from diabetes. These include

pain, numbness, or tingling in the feet or hands
sexual problems
chest pain NIH external link
vision loss
An older adult receiving an eye exam.
Vision loss can be a symptom of diabetes.
Gestational diabetes symptoms
Gestational diabetes is a type of diabetes that may develop when you are pregnant. Most people with this type of diabetes have no symptoms. If you do have symptoms of gestational diabetes, they may be mild, such as being thirstier than usual or having to urinate more often.

People with a history of gestational diabetes are at higher risk of developing type 2 diabetes later in life. If you have a history of gestational diabetes, your health care professional may recommend regular testing for type 2 diabetes.

What causes type 1 diabetes?
Type 1 diabetes develops when the body’s immune system NIH external link destroys the cells in the pancreas that make insulin. These cells are called beta cells. Genes and factors in the environment—the places where people live, play, work, study, and gather—may trigger the immune system to destroy beta cells in type 1 diabetes.

Insulin is a hormone that helps blood glucose get into the body’s cells to be used as energy. When your body doesn’t have enough insulin, glucose in your blood can’t get into the cells. As a result, your cells lack energy, your blood glucose level rises, and you develop diabetes.

Studies such as The Environmental Determinants of Diabetes in the Young (TEDDY) External link are trying to learn more about the causes of type 1 diabetes. Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet External link and other groups are working to find treatments that may prevent or slow the development of type 1 diabetes in people who are at risk for getting the disease.

What causes type 2 diabetes?
Type 2 diabetes is the most common form of diabetes. Type 2 diabetes develops when your pancreas doesn’t produce enough insulin, and your body has trouble using insulin, a condition called insulin resistance. Insulin resistance is when the cells in your muscles, fat, and liver don’t respond well to insulin. When there isn’t enough insulin to balance blood glucose levels, they begin to rise.

When blood glucose levels are higher than normal but not high enough to be diagnosed as type 2 diabetes, you have a condition called prediabetes. You have type 2 diabetes when health care professionals diagnose your blood glucose level as being too high.

Researchers don’t fully know what causes problems with insulin production and insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes. However, people are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes if they

have overweight, obesity, or a large waist size.
are age 35 or older. Children and teens can also develop type 2 diabetes, but the risk increases as a person gets older.
have a family history of type 2 diabetes.
are African American, American Indian, Asian American, Hispanic, Latino, or Pacific Islander.
are not physically active, because of a job that requires sitting for long periods of time or because of difficulty moving their body.
smoke External link, including tobacco products and e-cigarettes External link, or are exposed to secondhand smoke External link.
have prediabetes.
have a history of gestational diabetes, a type of diabetes that develops during pregnancy, or gave birth to a baby weighing 9 pounds or more.
You can’t change some of these risk factors, such as your age, family history, or race. However, you may be able to change some risk factors and prevent or delay type 2 diabetes by maintaining a healthy weight, being physically active, and stopping smoking.

Father and daughter dancing together.
You may be able to prevent type 2 diabetes by maintaining a healthy weight and being physically active.

What causes gestational diabetes?
Gestational diabetes occurs when your body can’t make the extra insulin that you need during pregnancy. Scientists believe that substances made in your body, called hormones, may play a role in causing this form of diabetes.

Changes to hormones during pregnancy can make it harder for blood glucose to enter the cells in your body. This causes insulin resistance. In most pregnancies, the pancreas can make enough insulin to overcome these changes. If the pancreas can’t make enough insulin, you’ll develop gestational diabetes.

You’re more likely to develop gestational diabetes if you have certain risk factors, such as

having overweight or obesity
gaining too much weight during pregnancy
having a family history of gestational diabetes, type 2 diabetes, or both
What else can cause diabetes?
Other causes of diabetes may include

diseases caused by changes in your genes, also called gene variants
endocrine diseases
damage to or removal of the pancreas
taking certain medicines
Diseases caused by changes in your genes
Gene variants NIH external link are changes to certain genes. Some gene variants can cause diseases that can affect the pancreas and lead to diabetes.

Monogenic diabetes
Monogenic diabetes is a group of rare forms of diabetes caused by a variant, or change, in a single gene. Parents may pass these gene variants to their children. In some cases, a person may be the first one with the variant in the family. Most forms of monogenic diabetes reduce the amount of insulin your pancreas can make.

Cystic fibrosis
Cystic fibrosis NIH external link is a genetic disease that leads to swelling and scarring in the pancreas. This scarring can prevent the pancreas from making enough insulin.

Hemochromatosis
Hemochromatosis is a genetic condition that causes your body and organs to build up harmful levels of iron NIH external link. If the disease is not treated, high levels of iron may damage your pancreas and other organs.

Endocrine diseases
Some endocrine diseases make the body produce too much of certain hormones. High levels of these hormones may cause insulin resistance or diabetes. Endocrine diseases that may cause insulin resistance or diabetes include

Cushing’s syndrome, which can cause the body to produce too much cortisol—often called the “stress hormone”
acromegaly, which can cause the body to produce too much growth hormone
hyperthyroidism, which can cause the body to produce too much thyroid hormone
hypothyroidism, which can cause the body to produce too little thyroid hormone
Damage to or removal of the pancreas
The pancreas can be damaged by injury or diseases such as inflammation of the pancreas, also called pancreatitis. Diabetes may be the first sign of pancreatic cancer NIH external link in older people without diabetes risk factors who develop diabetes. A damaged pancreas may make less insulin and lead to diabetes. In some cases, your pancreas may need to be removed. Without a pancreas, your body can’t produce insulin. You’ll develop diabetes and will have to take insulin.

Taking certain medicines
Certain medicines may harm the pancreas or affect the way insulin works in the body. Some of these medicines may include

antipsychotics NIH external link that are used to treat certain mental health problems
antiseizure medicines that are used to treat epilepsy NIH external link
beta-blockers and diuretics NIH external link that are used to treat high blood pressure
glucocorticoids NIH external link that are used to treat certain inflammatory diseases
immunosuppressants that are used after an organ transplant
niacin NIH external link, a type of vitamin B that is sometimes used to treat high blood cholesterol
Statins, which are medicines to reduce LDL (“bad”) cholesterol levels, can slightly increase the chance that you’ll develop diabetes. However, statins help protect you from heart disease NIH external link and stroke NIH external link. For this reason, the strong benefits of taking statins outweigh the small chance that you could develop diabetes.

If you take medicines for these conditions, you may want to ask your primary health care professional if your medicines could affect your risk of developing diabetes.

Clinical Trials for Symptoms and Causes of Diabetes
NIDDK conducts and supports clinical trials in many diseases and conditions, including diabetes. The trials look to find new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and improve quality of life.

What clinical trials study symptoms and causes of diabetes?
Clinical trials—and other types of clinical studies NIH external link—are part of medical research and involve people like you. When you volunteer to take part in a clinical study, you help doctors and researchers learn more about disease and improve health care for people in the future.

Researchers are studying many aspects of symptoms and causes of diabetes, such as

tests and treatments for rare and uncommon types of diabetes
body changes in people who develop diabetes after having pancreatitis
Find out if clinical trials are right for you NIH external link.

Watch a video of NIDDK Director Dr. Griffin P. Rodgers explaining the importance of participating in clinical trials.


What clinical trials about symptoms and causes of diabetes are looking for participants?
You can find clinical studies on symptoms and causes of diabetes at ClinicalTrials.gov NIH external link. In addition to searching for federally funded studies, you can expand or narrow your search to include clinical studies from industry, universities, and individuals; however, the National Institutes of Health does not review these studies and cannot ensure they are safe for you. Always talk with your primary health care professional before you participate in a clinical study.

What have we learned about symptoms and causes of diabetes from NIDDK-funded research?
NIDDK has funded many research projects to learn more about symptoms and causes of diabetes.

NIDDK-supported research helped scientists find genes linked to type 1 diabetes and new ways to identify people with type 1 diabetes before they develop symptoms.
NIDDK also supported research to test medicines in people with type 1 diabetes before symptoms develop and before they require insulin-replacement therapy. In 2022, this research led to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval of a medicine External link (PDF, 101.1 KB)  that may slow damage to the pancreas in early stages of type 1 diabetes.
The Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) studied how to prevent or delay disease in people at high risk of developing type 2 diabetes. The study found that participants who did regular physical activity and lost 5% to 7% of their body weight lowered their chance of developing type 2 diabetes.
NIDDK funds the Glycemic Observation and Metabolic Outcomes in Mothers and Offspring (GO MOMS) External link study, which is investigating ways to improve gestational diabetes screening and diagnosis by better understanding blood glucose levels throughout pregnancy. GO MOMs will set the foundation for future ways to screen, diagnose, and treat high blood glucose levels during pregnancy.
NIDDK supports the Rare and Atypical Diabetes Network (RADIANT) External link study, which is looking at ways to identify and define rare and atypical forms of diabetes.
NIDDK formed the Type 1 Diabetes in Acute Pancreatitis Consortium (T1DAPC) External link to study type 1 diabetes and other types of diabetes that are related to acute pancreatitis. As part of this group, the Diabetes Related to Acute Pancreatitis and Its Mechanisms (DREAM) study is looking at people with recent acute pancreatitis to see how many develop diabetes.
Last Reviewed October 2024Gestational Diabetes

View or Print All Sections
Definition & Facts
Gestational diabetes is a type of diabetes that occurs only during pregnancy. Gestational diabetes can cause health problems in both mother and baby. Managing your diabetes can help protect you and your baby.

Pregnant woman preparing meal with son from fresh vegetables
Symptoms & Causes
Gestational diabetes often has no symptoms, or they may be mild, such as being thirstier than normal or having to urinate more often. Gestational diabetes is sometimes related to the hormonal changes of pregnancy that make your body less able to use insulin. Genes and extra weight may also play a role.

Tests & Diagnosis
Your doctor will test you for gestational diabetes between 24 and 28 weeks of pregnancy. Tests include the glucose challenge test and the oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). If the results of the glucose challenge test show high blood glucose, you will return for an OGTT test to confirm the diagnosis of gestational diabetes.

Management & Treatment
Managing gestational diabetes includes following a healthy eating plan and being physically active. If your eating plan and physical activity aren’t enough to keep your blood glucose in your target range, you may need insulin.

Prevention
You can lower your chance of getting gestational diabetes by losing extra weight before you get pregnant if you are overweight. Being physically active before and during pregnancy also may help prevent gestational diabetes.

After Your Baby is Born
If you had gestational diabetes, you are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes. Your child is more likely to have obesity or develop type 2 diabetes. You may be able to lower your and your child’s chances of developing these problems by reaching a healthy weight, making healthy food choices, and being physically active.

Related Conditions & Diseases
Health Tips for Pregnant Women
Type 2 Diabetes
Clinical Trials
The NIDDK and other components of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) support and conduct research into many diseases and conditions.

View clinical trials that are currently recruiting volunteers NIH external link.

Additional Languages
This content is also available in:

Spanish
Related Research
See more about diabetes research at NIDDK.Monogenic Diabetes (MODY & Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus)
On this page:

What is monogenic diabetes?
What is maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)?
What is neonatal diabetes mellitus (NDM)?
How common is monogenic diabetes?
Who is more likely to have monogenic diabetes?
What health problems can people with monogenic diabetes develop?
What are the symptoms of monogenic diabetes?
What causes monogenic diabetes?
How do health care professionals diagnose monogenic diabetes?
What do I need to know about genetic counseling?
How can I manage monogenic diabetes?
Can I prevent monogenic diabetes?
Clinical Trials for Monogenic Diabetes
What is monogenic diabetes?
Monogenic diabetes is a group of uncommon forms of diabetes that are caused by a variant NIH external link, or change, in a single gene. Researchers have found variants in more than 20 genes that cause monogenic diabetes.1 Monogenic forms of diabetes are part of the group of atypical diabetes. People with atypical forms of diabetes have symptoms and signs that are different than those of type 1 or type 2 diabetes.

If you have monogenic diabetes, you may have high levels of blood glucose, also called blood sugar. Diabetes may raise your risk of eye, kidney, nerve, and heart damage. Diabetes is also linked to some types of cancer. You may be able to prevent or delay diabetes health problems by managing your blood glucose level.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and neonatal diabetes mellitus (NDM) are the two main forms of monogenic diabetes.

What is maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)?
MODY forms of diabetes usually develop in teens or young adults. People with some forms of MODY have blood glucose levels that are only a little higher than normal and do not change much during their lives. The levels of blood glucose are typically not high enough to damage their organs, so they may not need treatment. However, people with other forms of MODY have higher blood glucose levels and need treatment.

What is neonatal diabetes mellitus (NDM)?
NDM forms of diabetes develop in the first 6 to 12 months of life.2,3 Babies with forms of NDM do not produce enough insulin, which allows their blood glucose levels to go up more than normal. Babies who develop diabetes in the first 6 months of life almost always have a form of NDM.2

In most forms of NDM, babies will have lifelong diabetes. These forms of NDM are called permanent NDM. Babies with some forms of NDM have diabetes as infants, but their diabetes goes away during childhood. For these babies, diabetes often shows up again later in life. These forms of NDM are called transient NDM.

How common is monogenic diabetes?
Some research, mainly from the United States and Europe, has found that

about 1 to 5 of every 100 people with diabetes have monogenic diabetes4,5
NDM is a rare disease, and only 1 in every 90,000 babies has the disease4
People with monogenic diabetes may be misdiagnosed with type 1 or type 2 diabetes because the symptoms may be similar. Therefore, it is difficult to know how many people have monogenic diabetes.

Who is more likely to have monogenic diabetes?
People with MODY forms of diabetes usually have other family members with diabetes. MODY forms of diabetes most often occur in people ages 30 or younger.6 Forms of NDM most often occur in babies ages 6 months or younger.1,2 More studies are needed to understand which populations, based on race, are more affected by forms of MODY and NDM.

What health problems can people with monogenic diabetes develop?
Some people with forms of monogenic diabetes may develop the same diabetes health problems as people with other types of diabetes. High blood glucose levels from diabetes can damage every part of your body, including your

heart
kidneys
nerves
eyes
feet
teeth
If you have a form of monogenic diabetes, work with your primary health care professional, who may be a doctor, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner, to manage your diabetes. Your health care team can help you lower your chances of developing other health problems.

What are the symptoms of monogenic diabetes?
The symptoms of monogenic diabetes depend on which gene variant you have. Some people have no symptoms. Other people may have general symptoms of diabetes that include

increased urination
feeling thirsty
feeling very hungry, even after you have eaten
blurred vision
fatigue
numbness or tingling in the feet or hands
sores that do not heal
What causes monogenic diabetes?
A variant, or change, in a single gene causes monogenic diabetes.

You inherited genes—which determine things like your hair color, eye color, and height—from each of your parents. In most cases of MODY forms of diabetes, you inherit a gene from one or both parents that causes the disease.

Babies with NDM forms of diabetes rarely have a family history of the disease. Most cases of NDM are caused by a gene change that happens while a baby develops in the womb.

Most people with MODY forms of diabetes have inherited a gene for the disease from a parent who also had the disease. Diseases caused by a gene from one parent are called autosomal dominant NIH external link. If you have a form of NDM or MODY that is autosomal dominant, your child has a 50% chance of having the disease.

Some forms of NDM or MODY occur only if a child inherits a gene for the disease from both parents. In most cases, neither of the child’s parents had the disease. Diseases that occur only if you inherit a gene from both parents who don’t have the disease are called autosomal recessive NIH external link. If you inherit a gene for a recessive form of NDM or MODY from only one parent, you won’t have the disease. However, you can pass that gene to future generations.

Different gene variants cause monogenic diabetes in different ways. For example, gene variants may

affect how the pancreas develops
cause the pancreas to produce insulin that does not work well
destroy cells in the pancreas that produce insulin
How do health care professionals diagnose monogenic diabetes?
Your health care professional will usually test you for forms of monogenic diabetes if you have diabetes, are younger than 30 years old, don’t have overweight or obesity, and have family members with these forms of diabetes.

Health care professionals will diagnose diabetes using your symptoms, medical and family history, and diabetes tests. Your health care professional may also order tests to find out if your diabetes is type 1, type 2, or monogenic. The type of diabetes you have will help your health care professional determine how to treat the disease.

Blood glucose tests
Health care professionals can diagnose diabetes using blood tests that measure your glucose level to see if it is higher than normal. People with some forms of monogenic diabetes have blood glucose levels that are a little higher than normal.2

Blood glucose tests can help your health care professional tell if you have diabetes. However, these tests do not show the type of diabetes you have.

Autoantibodies
Your health care professional will order a test for autoantibodies to find out if you have type 1 diabetes. Autoantibodies are proteins made by your immune system that attack your healthy tissues and cells by mistake. In rare cases, people with monogenic diabetes may also have autoantibodies in their blood.

Genetic testing
Genetic testing NIH external link looks for gene variants. Health care professionals use genetic tests to diagnose monogenic diabetes.

Health care professionals may request a genetic test for2

babies ages 6 months or younger who develop diabetes
babies who develop diabetes between ages 6 months and 1 year and have some other medical problems
people who have diabetes at a young age, do not have overweight or obesity, and have a strong family history of diabetes
Young couple with a baby.
If you think you or a member of your family may have a monogenic form of diabetes, talk with your health care professional.
What do I need to know about genetic counseling?
If you, your partner, or family members have monogenic diabetes, you may want to consider genetic counseling NIH external link. Genetic counseling can help you decide if you should get tested for monogenic diabetes. Genetic counseling can also help you understand the risk of your children developing this disease. Talk with your health care professional for more information about how genetic counseling could help you, what it may cost, and whether it’s covered by your insurance.

How can I manage monogenic diabetes?
How you manage monogenic diabetes will depend on the specific gene variant you have. Your health care professional and diabetes care team will work with you to develop a plan to manage your diabetes. Your health care professional may refer you to, or work with, a medical center that focuses on monogenic diabetes to help manage the disease.

Medicines
Some people with monogenic diabetes may need diabetes medicines. These medicines may include

sulfonylureas, oral diabetes medicines that help your body make more insulin. These medicines can treat certain forms of MODY and NDM.
insulin. Some people with monogenic diabetes need to take insulin all their lives. Others may need to take insulin early in life and may be able to switch to sulfonylureas later in life.
other medicines. Some medicines, called sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors, work in your kidneys to get rid of glucose. Other medicines, called glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor (GLP-1) agonists, increase insulin production and decrease your appetite.
Diabetes medicines and office visits can be expensive. Talk with your health care professional or health care team if you are having trouble affording diabetes care. A health care professional, diabetes educator, or social worker may be able to tell you about resources that provide financial help for diabetes care.

Can I prevent monogenic diabetes?
At this time, monogenic diabetes can’t be prevented. However, researchers are working to find possible risk factors and ways to prevent the disease.

Clinical Trials for Monogenic Diabetes
NIDDK conducts and supports clinical trials in many diseases and conditions, including diabetes. The trials look to find new ways to prevent, detect, or treat disease and improve quality of life.

What are clinical trials for monogenic diabetes?
Clinical trials—and other types of clinical studies NIH external link—are part of medical research and involve people like you. When you volunteer to take part in a clinical study, you help doctors and researchers learn more about disease and improve health care for people in the future.

Researchers are studying different aspects of monogenic diabetes, such as ways to improve diagnosis.

Find out if clinical studies are right for you NIH external link.

Watch a video of NIDDK Director Dr. Griffin P. Rodgers explaining the importance of participating in clinical trials.


What clinical studies for monogenic diabetes are looking for participants?
You can find clinical studies on monogenic diabetes at ClinicalTrials.gov NIH external link. In addition to searching for federally funded studies, you can expand or narrow your search to include clinical studies from industry, universities, and individuals; however, the National Institutes of Health does not review these studies and cannot ensure they are safe for you. Always talk with your primary health care professional before you participate in a clinical study.

What have we learned about monogenic diabetes from NIDDK-funded research?
NIDDK has supported many research projects to learn more about monogenic diabetes

Progress in Diabetes Genetics in Youth (ProDiGY). This study evaluated how common MODY was among multiethnic youth who had a diagnosis of type 2 diabetes. The study found that 2.8% of the participants had MODY.7
a study with 160 participants showed that people with monogenic diabetes can also have obesity or overweight. They can also have antibodies that are seen in type 1 diabetes.
Monogenic Diabetes Registry. This database was created in 2008 to collect data related to diagnosis, treatment, and natural history of people with monogenic diabetes.
References
[1] Salguero MV, Arosemena M, Pollin T, et al. Monogenic forms of diabetes. In: Lawrence JM, Casagrande SS, Herman WH, Wexler DJ, Cefalu WT, eds. Diabetes in America. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK); December 20, 2023.

[2] Beltrand J, Busiah K, Vaivre-Douret L, et al. Neonatal diabetes mellitus. Frontiers in Pediatrics. 2020;8:540718. doi:10.3389/fped.2020.540718

[3] Blonde L, Umpierrez GE, Reddy SS, et al. American Association of Clinical Endocrinology clinical practice guideline: developing a diabetes mellitus comprehensive care plan—2022 update. Endocrine Practice. 2022;28(10):923–1049. doi:10.1016/j.eprac.2022.08.002

[4] Zhang H, Colclough K, Gloyn AL, Pollin TI. Monogenic diabetes: a gateway to precision medicine in diabetes. Journal of Clinical Investigation. 2021;131(3):e142244. doi:10.1172/JCI142244

[5] ElSayed NA, Aleppo G, Aroda VR, et al. 2. Classification and diagnosis of diabetes: standards of care in diabetes—2023. Diabetes Care. 2023;46(suppl 1):S19–S40. doi:10.2337/dc23-S002

[6] Kant R, Davis A, Verma V. Maturity-onset diabetes of the young: rapid evidence review. American Family Physician. 2022;105(2):162–167.

[7] Todd JN, Kleinberger JW, Zhang H, et al. Monogenic diabetes in youth with presumed type 2 diabetes: results from the Progress in Diabetes Genetics in Youth (ProDiGY) collaboration. Diabetes Care. 2021;44(10):2312–2319. doi:10.2337/dc21-0491.