Diabetes is a disease that occurs when your blood glucose, also called blood sugar, is too high. Glucose is your body’s main source of energy. Your body can make glucose, but glucose also comes from the food you eat.

Insulin is a hormone made by the pancreas that helps glucose get into your cells to be used for energy. If you have diabetes, your body doesn’t make enough—or any—insulin, or doesn’t use insulin properly. Glucose then stays in your blood and doesn’t reach your cells.

Diabetes raises the risk for damage to the eyes, kidneys, nerves, and heart. Diabetes is also linked to some types of cancer. Taking steps to prevent or manage diabetes may lower your risk of developing diabetes health problems.

View full-sized imageOn the left, a diagram of a blood vessel that has a normal blood glucose level and contains fewer glucose molecules. On the right, a diagram of a blood vessel that has a high blood glucose level and contains more glucose molecules.
Diabetes is a disease that occurs when your blood glucose, also called blood sugar, is too high.
What are the different types of diabetes?
The most common types of diabetes are type 1, type 2, and gestational diabetes.

Type 1 diabetes
If you have type 1 diabetes, your body makes little or no insulin. Your immune system attacks and destroys the cells in your pancreas that make insulin. Type 1 diabetes is usually diagnosed in children and young adults, although it can appear at any age. People with type 1 diabetes need to take insulin every day to stay alive.

Type 2 diabetes
If you have type 2 diabetes, the cells in your body don’t use insulin properly. The pancreas may be making insulin but is not making enough insulin to keep your blood glucose level in the normal range. Type 2 diabetes is the most common type of diabetes. You are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes if you have risk factors, such as overweight or obesity, and a family history of the disease. You can develop type 2 diabetes at any age, even during childhood.

You can help delay or prevent type 2 diabetes by knowing the risk factors and taking steps toward a healthier lifestyle, such as losing weight or preventing weight gain.

Gestational diabetes
Gestational diabetes is a type of diabetes that develops during pregnancy. Most of the time, this type of diabetes goes away after the baby is born. However, if you’ve had gestational diabetes, you have a higher chance of developing type 2 diabetes later in life. Sometimes diabetes diagnosed during pregnancy is type 2 diabetes.

Prediabetes
People with prediabetes have blood glucose levels that are higher than normal but not high enough to be diagnosed with type 2 diabetes. If you have prediabetes, you have a higher risk of developing type 2 diabetes in the future. You also have a higher risk for heart disease than people with normal glucose levels.

Other types of diabetes
A less common type of diabetes, called monogenic diabetes, is caused by a change in a single gene. Diabetes can also come from having surgery to remove the pancreas, or from damage to the pancreas due to conditions such as cystic fibrosis NIH external link or pancreatitis.

How common are diabetes and prediabetes?
More than 133 million Americans have diabetes or prediabetes.1

As of 2019, 37.3 million people—or 11.3% of the U.S. population—had diabetes.1 More than 1 in 4 people over the age of 65 had diabetes. Nearly 1 in 4 adults with diabetes didn’t know they had the disease.2

About 90% to 95% of diabetes cases are type 2 diabetes.3

In 2019, 96 million adults—38% of U.S. adults—had prediabetes.4

What other health problems can people with diabetes develop?
Over time, high blood glucose can damage your heart, kidneys, feet, and eyes. If you have diabetes, you can take steps to lower your chances of developing diabetes health problems by taking steps to improve your health and learning how to manage the disease. Managing your blood glucose, blood pressure, and cholesterol levels can help prevent future health problems.

Doctor using a special device to check the inside of a patient’s eye.
Managing your blood glucose levels can help prevent future health problems, such as damage to your eyes.

References
[1] National diabetes statistics report, 2022. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Updated January 18, 2022. Accessed August 4, 2022. www.cdc.gov/diabetes/php/data-research/ External link

[2] Prevalence of both diagnosed and undiagnosed diabetes. National diabetes statistics report, 2022. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Updated September 30, 2022. Accessed November 1, 2022. www.cdc.gov/diabetes/php/data-research/ External link

[3] Methods. National diabetes statistics report, 2022. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Updated September 30, 2022. Accessed November 1, 2022. www.cdc.gov/diabetes/php/data-research/methods.html External link

[4] Prevalence of prediabetes among adults. National diabetes statistics report, 2022. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Updated September 30, 2022. Accessed November 1, 2022. www.cdc.gov/diabetes/php/data-research/ External link.Type 1 Diabetes
On this page:

What is type 1 diabetes?
Who is more likely to develop type 1 diabetes?
What are the symptoms of type 1 diabetes?
What causes type 1 diabetes?
How do health care professionals diagnose type 1 diabetes?
What medicines do I need to treat my type 1 diabetes?
How else can I manage type 1 diabetes?
Do I have other treatment options for my type 1 diabetes?
What health problems can people with type 1 diabetes develop?
Can I lower my chance of developing type 1 diabetes?
What is type 1 diabetes?
Diabetes occurs when your blood glucose, also called blood sugar, is too high. Blood glucose is your main source of energy and comes mainly from the food you eat. Insulin, a hormone made by the pancreas, helps the glucose in your blood get into your cells to be used for energy. Another hormone, glucagon, works with insulin to control blood glucose levels.

In most people with type 1 diabetes, the body’s immune system, which normally fights infection, attacks and destroys the cells in the pancreas that make insulin. As a result, your pancreas stops making insulin. Without insulin, glucose can’t get into your cells and your blood glucose rises above normal. People with type 1 diabetes need to take insulin every day to stay alive.

A young woman injecting herself with insulin.
People with type 1 diabetes need to take insulin every day.
Who is more likely to develop type 1 diabetes?
Type 1 diabetes typically occurs in children and young adults, although it can appear at any age. Having a parent or sibling with the disease may increase your chance of developing type 1 diabetes. In the United States, about 5 percent of people with diabetes have type 1.1

What are the symptoms of type 1 diabetes?
Symptoms of type 1 diabetes are serious and usually happen quickly, over a few days to weeks. Symptoms can include

increased thirst and urination
increased hunger
blurred vision
fatigue
unexplained weight loss
Sometimes the first symptoms of type 1 diabetes are signs of a life-threatening condition called diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) NIH external link. Some symptoms of DKA include

breath that smells fruity
dry or flushed skin
nausea or vomiting
stomach pain
trouble breathing
trouble paying attention or feeling confused
DKA is serious and dangerous. If you or your child have symptoms of DKA, contact your health care professional right away, or go to the nearest hospital emergency room.

What causes type 1 diabetes?
Experts think type 1 diabetes is caused by genes and factors in the environment, such as viruses, that might trigger the disease. Researchers are working to pinpoint the causes of type 1 diabetes through studies such as TrialNet External link.

How do health care professionals diagnose type 1 diabetes?
Health care professionals usually test people for type 1 diabetes if they have clear-cut diabetes symptoms. Health care professionals most often use the random plasma glucose (RPG) test to diagnose type 1 diabetes. This blood test measures your blood glucose level at a single point in time. Sometimes health professionals also use the A1C blood test to find out how long someone has had high blood glucose.

Even though these tests can confirm that you have diabetes, they can’t identify what type you have. Treatment depends on the type of diabetes, so knowing whether you have type 1 or type 2 is important.

To find out if your diabetes is type 1, your health care professional may test your blood for certain autoantibodies. Autoantibodies are antibodies that attack your healthy tissues and cells by mistake. The presence of certain types of autoantibodies is common in type 1 but not in type 2 diabetes.

Because type 1 diabetes can run in families, your health care professional can test your family members for autoantibodies. Type 1 diabetes TrialNet, an international research network, also offers autoantibody testing to family members External link of people diagnosed with the disease. The presence of autoantibodies, even without diabetes symptoms, means the family member is more likely to develop type 1 diabetes. If you have a brother or sister, child, or parent with type 1 diabetes, you may want to get an autoantibody test. People age 20 or younger who have a cousin, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, grandparent, or half-sibling with type 1 diabetes also may want to get tested.

What medicines do I need to treat my type 1 diabetes?
If you have type 1 diabetes, you must take insulin because your body no longer makes this hormone. Different types of insulin start to work at different speeds, and the effects of each last a different length of time. You may need to use more than one type. You can take insulin a number of ways. Common options include a needle and syringe, insulin pen, or insulin pump.

Some people who have trouble reaching their blood glucose targets with insulin alone also might need to take another type of diabetes medicine that works with insulin, such as pramlintide NIH external link. Pramlintide, given by injection, helps keep blood glucose levels from going too high after eating. Few people with type 1 diabetes take pramlintide, however. The NIH has recently funded a large research study to test use of pramlintide along with insulin and glucagon in people with type 1 diabetes. Another diabetes medicine, metformin, may help decrease the amount of insulin you need to take, but more studies are needed to confirm this. Reseachers are also studying other diabetes pills that people with type 1 diabetes might take along with insulin.

Hypoglycemia, or low blood sugar, can occur if you take insulin but don’t match your dose with your food or physical activity. Severe hypoglycemia can be dangerous and needs to be treated right away. Learn more about hypoglycemia and how to prevent or treat it.

How else can I manage type 1 diabetes?
Along with insulin and any other medicines you use, you can manage your diabetes by taking care of yourself each day. Following your diabetes meal plan, being physically active, and checking your blood glucose often are some of the ways you can take care of yourself. Work with your health care team to come up with a diabetes care plan that works for you. If you are planning a pregnancy with diabetes, try to get your blood glucose levels in your target range before you get pregnant.

Do I have other treatment options for my type 1 diabetes?
The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) has played an important role in developing “artificial pancreas” technology. An artificial pancreas replaces manual blood glucose testing and the use of insulin shots. A single system monitors blood glucose levels around the clock and provides insulin or a combination of insulin and glucagon automatically. The system can also be monitored remotely, for example by parents or medical staff.

In 2016, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved a type of artificial pancreas system called a hybrid closed-loop system. This system tests your glucose level every 5 minutes throughout the day and night through a continuous glucose monitor, and automatically gives you the right amount of basal insulin, a long-acting insulin, through a separate insulin pump. You still need to manually adjust the amount of insulin the pump delivers at mealtimes and when you need a correction dose. You also will need to test your blood with a glucose meter several times a day. Talk with your health care provider about whether this system might be right for you.

The illustration below shows the parts of a type of artificial pancreas system.

Illustration of a person wearing an artificial pancreas system.
An artificial pancreas system uses a continuous glucose monitor, an insulin pump, and a control algorithm to give you the right amount of basal insulin.
The continuous glucose monitor sends information through a software program called a control algorithm. Based on your glucose level, the algorithm tells the insulin pump how much insulin to deliver. The software program could be installed on the pump or another device such as a cell phone or computer.

Starting in late 2016 and early 2017, the NIDDK has funded several important studies NIH external link on different types of artificial pancreas devices to better help people with type 1 diabetes manage their disease. The devices may also help people with type 2 diabetes and gestational diabetes.

NIDDK also supported research into pancreatic islet transplantation—a treatment for type 1 diabetes in people who struggle to manage their blood glucose levels. Pancreatic islets are clusters of cells in the pancreas that make the hormone insulin. In type 1 diabetes, the body’s immune system attacks these cells. A pancreatic islet transplant replaces destroyed islets with new islets from a deceased donor. The new islets make and release insulin.

What health problems can people with type 1 diabetes develop?
Over time, high blood glucose leads to problems such as

heart disease
stroke
kidney disease
eye problems
dental disease
nerve damage
foot problems
depression
sleep apnea
If you have type 1 diabetes, you can help prevent or delay the health problems of diabetes by managing your blood glucose, blood pressure, and cholesterol, and following your self-care plan.

Can I lower my chance of developing type 1 diabetes?
At this time, type 1 diabetes can’t be prevented. However, through studies such as TrialNet, researchers are working to identify possible ways to prevent or slow down the disease.

References
[1] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National diabetes statistics report, 2017. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pdfs/data/statistics/national-diabetes-statistics-report.pdf External link (PDF, 1.3 MB) . Updated July, 18 2017. Accessed August 1, 2017.Type 2 Diabetes
On this page:

What is type 2 diabetes?
Who is more likely to develop type 2 diabetes?
What are the symptoms of diabetes?
What causes type 2 diabetes?
How do health care professionals diagnose type 2 diabetes?
How can I manage my type 2 diabetes?
What medicines do I need to treat my type 2 diabetes?
What health problems can people with diabetes develop?
How can I lower my chances of developing type 2 diabetes?
What is type 2 diabetes?
Type 2 diabetes, the most common type of diabetes, is a disease that occurs when your blood glucose, also called blood sugar, is too high. Blood glucose is your main source of energy and comes mainly from the food you eat. Insulin, a hormone made by the pancreas, helps glucose get into your cells to be used for energy. In type 2 diabetes, your body doesn’t make enough insulin or doesn’t use insulin well. Too much glucose then stays in your blood, and not enough reaches your cells.

The good news is that you can take steps to prevent or delay the development of type 2 diabetes.

Who is more likely to develop type 2 diabetes?
You can develop type 2 diabetes at any age, even during childhood. However, type 2 diabetes occurs most often in middle-aged and older people. You are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes if you are age 45 or older, have a family history of diabetes, or are overweight or have obesity. Diabetes is more common in people who are African American, Hispanic/Latino, American Indian, Asian American, or Pacific Islander.

Physical inactivity and certain health problems such as high blood pressure affect your chances of developing type 2 diabetes. You are also more likely to develop type 2 diabetes if you have prediabetes or had gestational diabetes when you were pregnant. Learn more about risk factors for type 2 diabetes.

A smiling overweight older man
Type 2 diabetes occurs most often in middle-aged and older people.
What are the symptoms of diabetes?
Symptoms of diabetes include

increased thirst and urination
increased hunger
feeling tired
blurred vision
numbness or tingling in the feet or hands
sores that do not heal
unexplained weight loss
Symptoms of type 2 diabetes often develop slowly—over the course of several years—and can be so mild that you might not even notice them. Many people have no symptoms. Some people do not find out they have the disease until they have diabetes-related health problems, such as blurred vision or heart disease.

What causes type 2 diabetes?
Type 2 diabetes is caused by several factors, including

overweight and obesity
not being physically active
insulin resistance
genes
Learn more about the causes of type 2 diabetes.

How do health care professionals diagnose type 2 diabetes?
Your health care professional can diagnose type 2 diabetes based on blood tests. Learn more about blood tests for diabetes and what the results mean.

How can I manage my type 2 diabetes?
Managing your blood glucose, blood pressure, and cholesterol, and quitting smoking if you smoke, are important ways to manage your type 2 diabetes. Lifestyle changes that include planning healthy meals, limiting calories if you are overweight, and being physically active are also part of managing your diabetes. So is taking any prescribed medicines. Work with your health care team to create a diabetes care plan that works for you.

A smiling young woman chopping vegetables in her kitchen
Following your meal plan helps you manage your diabetes.
What medicines do I need to treat my type 2 diabetes?
Along with following your diabetes care plan, you may need diabetes medicines, which may include pills or medicines you inject under your skin, such as insulin. Over time, you may need more than one diabetes medicine to manage your blood glucose. Even if you don’t take insulin, you may need it at special times, such as during pregnancy or if you are in the hospital. You also may need medicines for high blood pressure, high cholesterol, or other conditions.

Learn more about medicines, insulin, and other diabetes treatments.

What health problems can people with diabetes develop?
Following a good diabetes care plan can help protect against many diabetes-related health problems. However, if not managed, diabetes can lead to problems such as

heart disease and stroke
nerve damage
kidney disease
foot problems
eye disease
gum disease and other dental problems
sexual and bladder problems
Many people with type 2 diabetes also have nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Losing weight if you are overweight or have obesity can improve NAFLD. Diabetes is also linked to other health problems such as sleep apnea, depression, some types of cancer, and dementia NIH external link.

You can take steps to lower your chances of developing these diabetes-related health problems.

How can I lower my chances of developing type 2 diabetes?
Research such as the Diabetes Prevention Program External link, sponsored by the National Institutes of Health, has shown that you can take steps to reduce your chances of developing type 2 diabetes if you have risk factors for the disease. Here are some things you can do to lower your risk:

Lose weight if you are overweight, and keep it off. You may be able to prevent or delay diabetes by losing 5 to 7 percent of your current weight.1 For instance, if you weigh 200 pounds, your goal would be to lose about 10 to 14 pounds.
 
Diabetes Risk Management Calculator
Losing 5% to 7% of your body weight may reduce your risk of diabetes.†

Heightin feet 
5
 
10
Weightin pounds 
200
Calculate
† For adults 20 and older at high risk of developing type 2 diabetesBack to content
Supported by a study from
Move more. Get at least 30 minutes of physical activity, such as walking, at least 5 days a week. If you have not been active, talk with your health care professional about which activities are best. Start slowly and build up to your goal.
Eat healthy foods. Eat smaller portions to reduce the amount of calories you eat each day and help you lose weight. Choosing foods with less fat is another way to reduce calories. Drink water instead of sweetened beverages.
Ask your health care team what other changes you can make to prevent or delay type 2 diabetes.

Most often, your best chance for preventing type 2 diabetes is to make lifestyle changes that work for you long term. Get started with Your Game Plan to Prevent Type 2 Diabetes.

References
[1] Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. Long-term effects of lifestyle intervention or metformin on diabetes development and microvascular complications over 15-year follow-up: the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study. The Lancet Diabetes & Endocrinology. 2015;3(11):866‒875. You can find more information about this study on the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study website.

Last Reviewed May 2017.Insulin Resistance & Prediabetes
On this page:

What is insulin?
What is insulin resistance?
What is prediabetes?
How common is prediabetes?
Who is more likely to develop insulin resistance or prediabetes?
What causes insulin resistance and prediabetes?
What are the symptoms of insulin resistance and prediabetes?
How do doctors diagnose insulin resistance and prediabetes?
How can I prevent or reverse insulin resistance and prediabetes?
Clinical Trials
Insulin resistance and prediabetes occur when your body doesn’t use insulin well.

What is insulin?
Insulin is a hormone made by the pancreas that helps glucose in your blood enter cells in your muscle, fat, and liver, where it’s used for energy. Glucose comes from the food you eat. The liver also makes glucose in times of need, such as when you’re fasting. When blood glucose, also called blood sugar, levels rise after you eat, your pancreas releases insulin into the blood. Insulin then lowers blood glucose to keep it in the normal range.

What is insulin resistance?
Insulin resistance is when cells in your muscles, fat, and liver don’t respond well to insulin and can’t easily take up glucose from your blood. As a result, your pancreas makes more insulin to help glucose enter your cells. As long as your pancreas can make enough insulin to overcome your cells’ weak response to insulin, your blood glucose levels will stay in the healthy range.

What is prediabetes?
Prediabetes means your blood glucose levels are higher than normal but not high enough to be diagnosed as diabetes. Prediabetes usually occurs in people who already have some insulin resistance or whose beta cells in the pancreas aren’t making enough insulin to keep blood glucose in the normal range. Without enough insulin, extra glucose stays in your bloodstream rather than entering your cells. Over time, you could develop type 2 diabetes.

How common is prediabetes?
More than 84 million people ages 18 and older have prediabetes in the United States.1 That’s about 1 out of every 3 adults.

Who is more likely to develop insulin resistance or prediabetes?
People who have genetic or lifestyle risk factors are more likely to develop insulin resistance or prediabetes. Risk factors include

overweight or obesity
age 45 or older
a parent, brother, or sister with diabetes
African American, Alaska Native, American Indian, Asian American, Hispanic/Latino, Native Hawaiian, or Pacific Islander American ethnicity
physical inactivity
health conditions such as high blood pressure and abnormal cholesterol levels
a history of gestational diabetes
a history of heart disease or stroke
polycystic ovary syndrome, also called PCOS
People who have metabolic syndrome—a combination of high blood pressure, abnormal cholesterol levels, and large waist size—are more likely to have prediabetes.

Along with these risk factors, other things that may contribute to insulin resistance include

certain medicines, such as glucocorticoids NIH external link, some antipsychotics NIH external link, and some medicines for HIV NIH external link
hormonal disorders, such as Cushing’s syndrome and acromegaly
sleep problems, especially sleep apnea NIH external link
Although you can’t change risk factors such as family history, age, or ethnicity, you can change lifestyle risk factors around eating, physical activity, and weight. These lifestyle changes can lower your chances of developing insulin resistance or prediabetes.

An overweight Hispanic woman smiling
Being overweight or having obesity are risk factors for developing insulin resistance or prediabetes.
What causes insulin resistance and prediabetes?
Researchers don’t fully understand what causes insulin resistance and prediabetes, but they think excess weight and lack of physical activity are major factors.

Excess weight
Experts believe obesity, especially too much fat in the abdomen and around the organs, called visceral fat, is a main cause of insulin resistance. A waist measurement of 40 inches or more for men and 35 inches or more for women is linked to insulin resistance. This is true even if your body mass index (BMI) falls within the normal range. However, research has shown that Asian Americans may have an increased risk for insulin resistance even without a high BMI.

Researchers used to think that fat tissue was only for energy storage. However, studies have shown that belly fat makes hormones and other substances that can contribute to chronic, or long-lasting, inflammation in the body. Inflammation may play a role in insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease.

Excess weight may lead to insulin resistance, which in turn may play a part in the development of fatty liver disease.

Physical inactivity
Not getting enough physical activity is linked to insulin resistance and prediabetes. Regular physical activity causes changes in your body that make it better able to keep your blood glucose levels in balance.

What are the symptoms of insulin resistance and prediabetes?
Insulin resistance and prediabetes usually have no symptoms. Some people with prediabetes may have darkened skin in the armpit or on the back and sides of the neck, a condition called acanthosis nigricans. Many small skin growths called skin tags often appear in these same areas.

Even though blood glucose levels are not high enough to cause symptoms for most people, a few research studies have shown that some people with prediabetes may already have early changes in their eyes that can lead to retinopathy. This problem more often occurs in people with diabetes.

How do doctors diagnose insulin resistance and prediabetes?
Doctors use blood tests to find out if someone has prediabetes, but they don’t usually test for insulin resistance. The most accurate test for insulin resistance is complicated and used mostly for research.

A health care professional draws blood from a person’s arm.
Doctors use blood tests to find out if someone has prediabetes.
Doctors most often use the fasting plasma glucose (FPG) test or the A1C test to diagnose prediabetes. Less often, doctors use the oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), which is more expensive and not as easy to give.

The A1C test reflects your average blood glucose over the past 3 months. The FPG and OGTT show your blood glucose level at the time of the test. The A1C test is not as sensitive as the other tests. In some people, it may miss prediabetes that the OGTT could catch. The OGTT can identify how your body handles glucose after a meal—often before your fasting blood glucose level becomes abnormal. Often doctors use the OGTT to check for gestational diabetes, a type of diabetes that develops during pregnancy.

People with prediabetes have up to a 50 percent chance of developing diabetes over the next 5 to 10 years. You can take steps to manage your prediabetes and prevent type 2 diabetes.

The following test results show Prediabetes2

A1C—5.7 to 6.4 percent
FPG—100 to 125 mg/dL (milligrams per deciliter)
OGTT—140 to 199 mg/dL
You should be tested for prediabetes if you are overweight or have obesity and have one or more other risk factors for diabetes, or if your parents, siblings, or children have type 2 diabetes. Even if you don’t have risk factors, you should start getting tested once you reach age 45.

If the results are normal but you have other risk factors for diabetes, you should be retested at least every 3 years.2

How can I prevent or reverse insulin resistance and prediabetes?
Physical activity and losing weight if you need to may help your body respond better to insulin. Taking small steps, such as eating healthier foods External link and moving more to lose weight, can help reverse insulin resistance and prevent or delay type 2 diabetes in people with prediabetes.

An African American man walking briskly in a park
Physical activity can help prevent or reverse insulin resistance and prediabetes.
The National Institutes of Health-funded research study, the Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP), showed that for people at high risk of developing diabetes, losing 5 to 7 percent of their starting weight helped reduce their chance of developing the disease.3 That’s 10 to 14 pounds for someone who weighs 200 pounds. People in the study lost weight by changing their diet and being more physically active.

 
Diabetes Risk Management Calculator
Losing 5% to 7% of your body weight may reduce your risk of diabetes.†

Heightin feet 
5
 
10
Weightin pounds 
200
Calculate
† For adults 20 and older at high risk of developing type 2 diabetesBack to content
Supported by a study from
The DPP also showed that taking metformin NIH external link, a medicine used to treat diabetes, could delay diabetes. Metformin worked best for women with a history of gestational diabetes, younger adults, and people with obesity. Ask your doctor if metformin might be right for you.

Making a plan, tracking your progress, and getting support from your health care professional, family, and friends can help you make lifestyle changes that may prevent or reverse insulin resistance and prediabetes. You may be able to take part in a lifestyle change program as part of the National Diabetes Prevention Program External link.

Clinical Trials
The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) and other components of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) conduct and support research into many diseases and conditions.

What are clinical trials, and are they right for you?
Clinical trials are part of clinical research and at the heart of all medical advances. Clinical trials look at new ways to prevent, detect, or treat disease. Researchers also use clinical trials to look at other aspects of care, such as improving the quality of life for people with chronic illnesses. Find out if clinical trials are right for you NIH external link.

What clinical trials are open?
Clinical trials that are currently open and are recruiting can be viewed at ClinicalTrials.gov NIH external link.

References
[1] National Diabetes Statistics Report, 2017. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/php/data-research/index.html External link. Updated July 17, 2017. Accessed October 19, 2017.

[2] American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in diabetes—2017. Diabetes Care. 2017;40(Suppl 1).

[3] Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. Long-term effects of lifestyle intervention or metformin on diabetes development and microvascular complications over 15-year follow-up: the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study. The Lancet: Diabetes & Endocrinology. 2015;3(11):866‒875. Diabetes, also known as diabetes mellitus, is a group of common endocrine diseases characterized by sustained high blood sugar levels.[10][11] Diabetes is due to either the pancreas not producing enough of the hormone insulin, or the cells of the body becoming unresponsive to insulin's effects.[12] Classic symptoms include polydipsia (excessive thirst), polyuria (excessive urination), polyphagia (excessive hunger), weight loss, and blurred vision. If left untreated, the disease can lead to various health complications, including disorders of the cardiovascular system, eye, kidney, and nerves.[3] Diabetes accounts for approximately 4.2 million deaths every year,[9] with an estimated 1.5 million caused by either untreated or poorly treated diabetes.[10]

The major types of diabetes are type 1 and type 2.[13] The most common treatment for type 1 is insulin replacement therapy (insulin injections), while anti-diabetic medications (such as metformin and semaglutide) and lifestyle modifications can be used to manage type 2. Gestational diabetes, a form that arises during pregnancy in some women, normally resolves shortly after delivery. Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune condition where the body's immune system attacks the beta cells in the pancreas, preventing the production of insulin. This condition is typically present from birth or develops early in life. Type 2 diabetes occurs when the body becomes resistant to insulin, meaning the cells do not respond effectively to it, and thus, glucose remains in the bloodstream instead of being absorbed by the cells.[14]

The number of people diagnosed as living with diabetes has increased sharply in recent decades, from 200 million in 1990 to 830 million by 2022.[15][16] It affects one in seven of the adult population, with type 2 diabetes accounting for more than 95% of cases. These numbers have already risen beyond earlier projections of 783 million adults by 2045.[17] The prevalence of the disease continues to increase, most dramatically in low- and middle-income nations.[18] Rates are similar in women and men, with diabetes being the seventh leading cause of death globally.[19][20] The global expenditure on diabetes-related healthcare is an estimated US$760 billion a year.[21]

Signs and symptoms

Overview of the most significant symptoms of diabetes

Retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy are potential complications of diabetes
Common symptoms of diabetes include increased thirst, frequent urination, extreme hunger, and unintended weight loss.[22][23] Several other non-specific signs and symptoms may also occur, including fatigue, blurred vision, sweet smelling urine/semen and genital itchiness due to Candida infection.[23] About half of affected individuals may also be asymptomatic.[23] Type 1 presents abruptly following a pre-clinical phase, while type 2 has a more insidious onset; patients may remain asymptomatic for many years.[24]

Diabetic ketoacidosis is a medical emergency that occurs most commonly in type 1, but may also occur in type 2 if it has been longstanding or if the individual has significant β-cell dysfunction.[25] Excessive production of ketone bodies leads to signs and symptoms including nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, the smell of acetone in the breath, deep breathing known as Kussmaul breathing, and in severe cases decreased level of consciousness.[25] Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state is another emergency characterized by dehydration secondary to severe hyperglycemia, with resultant hypernatremia leading to an altered mental state and possibly coma.[26]

Hypoglycemia is a recognized complication of insulin treatment used in diabetes.[27] An acute presentation can include mild symptoms such as sweating, trembling, and palpitations, to more serious effects including impaired cognition, confusion, seizures, coma, and rarely death.[27] Recurrent hypoglycemic episodes may lower the glycemic threshold at which symptoms occur, meaning mild symptoms may not appear before cognitive deterioration begins to occur.[27]

Long-term complications
Main article: Complications of diabetes
The major long-term complications of diabetes relate to damage to blood vessels at both macrovascular and microvascular levels.[28][29] Diabetes doubles the risk of cardiovascular disease, and about 75% of deaths in people with diabetes are due to coronary artery disease.[30] Other macrovascular morbidities include stroke and peripheral artery disease.[31]

Microvascular disease affects the eyes, kidneys, and nerves.[28] Damage to the retina, known as diabetic retinopathy, is the most common cause of blindness in people of working age.[23] The eyes can also be affected in other ways, including development of cataract and glaucoma.[23] It is recommended that people with diabetes visit an optometrist or ophthalmologist once a year.[32]

Diabetic nephropathy is a major cause of chronic kidney disease, accounting for over 50% of patients on dialysis in the United States.[33] Diabetic neuropathy, damage to nerves, manifests in various ways, including sensory loss, neuropathic pain, and autonomic dysfunction (such as postural hypotension, diarrhoea, and erectile dysfunction).[23] Loss of pain sensation predisposes to trauma that can lead to diabetic foot problems (such as ulceration), the most common cause of non-traumatic lower-limb amputation.[23]

Hearing loss is another long-term complication associated with diabetes.[34]

Based on extensive data and numerous cases of gallstone disease, it appears that a causal link might exist between type 2 diabetes and gallstones. People with diabetes are at a higher risk of developing gallstones compared to those without diabetes.[35]

There is a link between cognitive deficit and diabetes; studies have shown that diabetic individuals are at a greater risk of cognitive decline, and have a greater rate of decline compared to those without the disease.[36] Diabetes increases the risk of dementia, and the earlier that one is diagnosed with diabetes, the higher the risk becomes.[37] The condition also predisposes to falls in the elderly, especially those treated with insulin.[38]

Types
Comparison of type 1 and 2 diabetes[39]
Feature	Type 1 diabetes	Type 2 diabetes
Onset	Sudden	Gradual, Insidious
Age at onset	Any age; average age at diagnosis being 24.[40]	Mostly in adults
Body size	Thin or normal[41]	Often obese
Ketoacidosis	Common	Rare
Autoantibodies	Usually present	Absent
Endogenous insulin	Low or absent	Normal, decreased
or increased
Heritability	0.69 to 0.88[42][43][44]	0.47 to 0.77[45]
Prevalence
(age standardized)

<2 per 1,000[46]	~6% (men), ~5% (women)[47]
Diabetes is classified by the World Health Organization into six categories: type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes, hybrid forms of diabetes (including slowly evolving, immune-mediated diabetes of adults and ketosis-prone type 2 diabetes), hyperglycemia first detected during pregnancy, "other specific types", and "unclassified diabetes".[48] Diabetes is a more variable disease than once thought, and individuals may have a combination of forms.[49]

Type 1
Main article: Type 1 diabetes
Type 1 accounts for 5 to 10% of diabetes cases and is the most common type of diabetes diagnosed in patients under 20 years;[50] however, the older term "juvenile-onset diabetes" is no longer used as onset in adulthood is possible.[33] The disease is characterized by loss of the insulin-producing beta cells of the pancreatic islets, leading to severe insulin deficiency, and can be further classified as immune-mediated or idiopathic (without known cause).[50] The majority of cases are immune-mediated, in which a T cell-mediated autoimmune attack causes loss of beta cells and thus insulin deficiency.[51] Patients often have irregular and unpredictable blood sugar levels due to very low insulin and an impaired counter-response to hypoglycemia.[52]


Autoimmune attack in type 1 diabetes.
Type 1 diabetes is partly inherited, with multiple genes, including certain HLA genotypes, known to influence the risk of diabetes. In genetically susceptible people, the onset of diabetes can be triggered by one or more environmental factors,[53] such as a viral infection or diet. Several viruses have been implicated, but to date there is no stringent evidence to support this hypothesis in humans.[53][54]

Type 1 diabetes can occur at any age, and a significant proportion is diagnosed during adulthood. Latent autoimmune diabetes of adults (LADA) is the diagnostic term applied when type 1 diabetes develops in adults; it has a slower onset than the same condition in children. Given this difference, some use the unofficial term "type 1.5 diabetes" for this condition.[55] Adults with LADA are frequently initially misdiagnosed as having type 2 diabetes, based on age rather than a cause.[56] LADA leaves adults with higher levels of insulin production than type 1 diabetes, but not enough insulin production for healthy blood sugar levels.[57][58]

Type 2
Main article: Type 2 diabetes

Reduced insulin secretion or weaker effect of insulin on its receptor leads to high glucose content in the blood.
Type 2 diabetes is characterized by insulin resistance, which may be combined with relatively reduced insulin secretion.[12] The defective responsiveness of body tissues to insulin is believed to involve the insulin receptor.[59] However, the specific defects are not known. Diabetes mellitus cases due to a known defect are classified separately. Type 2 diabetes is the most common type of diabetes mellitus accounting for 95% of diabetes.[2] Many people with type 2 diabetes have evidence of prediabetes (impaired fasting glucose and/or impaired glucose tolerance) before meeting the criteria for type 2 diabetes.[60] The progression of prediabetes to overt type 2 diabetes can be slowed or reversed by lifestyle changes or medications that improve insulin sensitivity or reduce the liver's glucose production.[61]

Type 2 diabetes is primarily due to lifestyle factors and genetics.[62] A number of lifestyle factors are known to be important to the development of type 2 diabetes, including obesity (defined by a body mass index of greater than 30), lack of physical activity, poor diet such as Western Pattern Diet, stress, and urbanization.[39][63] Excess body fat is associated with 30% of cases in people of Chinese and Japanese descent, 60–80% of cases in those of European and African descent, and 100% of Pima Indians and Pacific Islanders.[12] Even those who are not obese may have a high waist–hip ratio.[12]

Dietary factors such as sugar-sweetened drinks are associated with an increased risk.[64][65][66] The type of fats in the diet is also important, with saturated fat and trans fats increasing the risk and polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fat decreasing the risk.[62] Eating white rice excessively may increase the risk of diabetes, especially in Chinese and Japanese people.[67]

Adverse childhood experiences, including abuse, neglect, and household difficulties, increase the likelihood of type 2 diabetes later in life by 32%, with neglect having the strongest effect.[68]

Antipsychotic medication, SSRI, and SNRI side effects (specifically metabolic abnormalities, dyslipidemia and weight gain) are also potential risk factors.[69]

Gestational diabetes
Main article: Gestational diabetes
Gestational diabetes resembles type 2 diabetes in several respects, involving a combination of relatively inadequate insulin secretion and responsiveness. It occurs in about 2–10% of all pregnancies and may improve or disappear after delivery.[70] It is recommended that all pregnant women get tested starting around 24–28 weeks gestation.[71] It is most often diagnosed in the second or third trimester because of the increase in insulin-antagonist hormone levels that occurs at this time.[71] However, after pregnancy approximately 5–10% of women with gestational diabetes are found to have another form of diabetes, most commonly type 2.[70] Gestational diabetes is fully treatable, but requires careful medical supervision throughout the pregnancy. Management may include dietary changes, blood glucose monitoring, and in some cases, insulin may be required.[72]

Though it may be transient, untreated gestational diabetes can damage the health of the fetus or mother. Risks to the baby include macrosomia (high birth weight), congenital heart and central nervous system abnormalities, and skeletal muscle malformations. Increased levels of insulin in a fetus's blood may inhibit fetal surfactant production and cause infant respiratory distress syndrome. A high blood bilirubin level may result from red blood cell destruction. In severe cases, perinatal death may occur, most commonly as a result of poor placental perfusion due to vascular impairment. Labor induction may be indicated with decreased placental function. A caesarean section may be performed if there is marked fetal distress[73] or an increased risk of injury associated with macrosomia, such as shoulder dystocia.[74]

As the risk of developing type 2 diabetes is about 10 times higher in women with a history of gestational diabetes, postpartum screening may involve dietary, lifestyle, and drug interventions to prevent or delay its progression.[75]

Other types
Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a rare autosomal dominant inherited form of diabetes, due to one of several single-gene mutations causing defects in insulin production.[76] It is significantly less common than the three main types, constituting 1–2% of all cases. The name of this disease refers to early hypotheses as to its nature. Being due to a defective gene, this disease varies in age at presentation and in severity according to the specific gene defect; thus, there are at least 14 subtypes of MODY.[77] People with MODY often can control it without using insulin.[78]

Some cases of diabetes are caused by the body's tissue receptors not responding to insulin (even when insulin levels are normal, which is what separates it from type 2 diabetes); this form is very uncommon. Genetic mutations (autosomal or mitochondrial) can lead to defects in beta cell function. Abnormal insulin action may also have been genetically determined in some cases. Any disease that causes extensive damage to the pancreas may lead to diabetes (for example, chronic pancreatitis and cystic fibrosis). Diseases associated with excessive secretion of insulin-antagonistic hormones can cause diabetes (which is typically resolved once the hormone excess is removed). Many drugs impair insulin secretion and some toxins damage pancreatic beta cells, whereas others increase insulin resistance (especially glucocorticoids which can provoke "steroid diabetes"). The ICD-10 (1992) diagnostic entity, malnutrition-related diabetes mellitus (ICD-10 code E12), was deprecated by the World Health Organization (WHO) when the current taxonomy was introduced in 1999.[79] Yet another form of diabetes that people may develop is double diabetes. This is when a type 1 diabetic becomes insulin resistant, the hallmark for type 2 diabetes or has a family history for type 2 diabetes.[80] It was first discovered in 1990 or 1991.

The following is a list of disorders that may increase the risk of diabetes:[81]

Genetic defects of β-cell function
Maturity onset diabetes of the young
Mitochondrial DNA mutations
Genetic defects in insulin processing or insulin action
Defects in proinsulin conversion
Insulin gene mutations
Insulin receptor mutations
Exocrine pancreatic defects (see Type 3c diabetes, i.e. pancreatogenic diabetes)
Chronic pancreatitis
Pancreatectomy
Pancreatic neoplasia
Cystic fibrosis
Hemochromatosis
Fibrocalculous pancreatopathy
Endocrinopathies
Growth hormone excess (acromegaly)
Cushing syndrome
Hyperthyroidism
Hypothyroidism
Pheochromocytoma
Glucagonoma
Infections
Cytomegalovirus infection
Coxsackievirus B
Drugs
Glucocorticoids
Thyroid hormone
β-adrenergic agonists
Statins[82]
Pathophysiology

The fluctuation of blood sugar (red) and the sugar-lowering hormone insulin (blue) in humans during the course of a day with three meals. One of the effects of a sugar-rich vs a starch-rich meal is highlighted.

Mechanism of insulin release in normal pancreatic beta cells. Insulin production is more or less constant within the beta cells. Its release is triggered by food, chiefly food containing absorbable glucose.
Insulin is the principal hormone that regulates the uptake of glucose from the blood into most cells of the body, especially liver, adipose tissue and muscle, except smooth muscle, in which insulin acts via the IGF-1.[83] Therefore, deficiency of insulin or the insensitivity of its receptors play a central role in all forms of diabetes mellitus.[84]

The body obtains glucose from three main sources: the intestinal absorption of food; the breakdown of glycogen (glycogenolysis), the storage form of glucose found in the liver; and gluconeogenesis, the generation of glucose from non-carbohydrate substrates in the body.[85] Insulin plays a critical role in regulating glucose levels in the body. Insulin can inhibit the breakdown of glycogen or the process of gluconeogenesis, it can stimulate the transport of glucose into fat and muscle cells, and it can stimulate the storage of glucose in the form of glycogen.[85]

Insulin is released into the blood by beta cells (β-cells), found in the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas, in response to rising levels of blood glucose, typically after eating. Insulin is used by about two-thirds of the body's cells to absorb glucose from the blood for use as fuel, for conversion to other needed molecules, or for storage. Lower glucose levels result in decreased insulin release from the beta cells and in the breakdown of glycogen to glucose. This process is mainly controlled by the hormone glucagon, which acts in the opposite manner to insulin.[86]

If the amount of insulin available is insufficient, or if cells respond poorly to the effects of insulin (insulin resistance), or if the insulin itself is defective, then glucose is not absorbed properly by the body cells that require it, and is not stored appropriately in the liver and muscles. The net effect is persistently high levels of blood glucose, poor protein synthesis, and other metabolic derangements, such as metabolic acidosis in cases of complete insulin deficiency.[85]

When there is too much glucose in the blood for a long time, the kidneys cannot absorb it all (reach a threshold of reabsorption) and the extra glucose gets passed out of the body through urine (glycosuria).[87] This increases the osmotic pressure of the urine and inhibits reabsorption of water by the kidney, resulting in increased urine production (polyuria) and increased fluid loss. Lost blood volume is replaced osmotically from water in body cells and other body compartments, causing dehydration and increased thirst (polydipsia).[85] In addition, intracellular glucose deficiency stimulates appetite leading to excessive food intake (polyphagia).[88]

Diagnosis
See also: Glycated hemoglobin and Glucose tolerance test
Diabetes mellitus is diagnosed with a test for the glucose content in the blood, and is diagnosed by demonstrating any one of the following:[79]

Fasting plasma glucose level ≥ 7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL). For this test, blood is taken after a period of fasting, i.e. in the morning before breakfast, after the patient had sufficient time to fast overnight or at least 8 hours before the test.
Plasma glucose ≥ 11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) two hours after a 75 gram oral glucose load as in a glucose tolerance test (OGTT)
Symptoms of high blood sugar and plasma glucose ≥ 11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) either while fasting or not fasting
Glycated hemoglobin (HbA1C) ≥ 48 mmol/mol (≥ 6.5 DCCT %).[89]
WHO diabetes diagnostic criteria[90][91]  edit
Condition	2-hour glucose	Fasting glucose	HbA1c
Unit	mmol/L	mg/dL	mmol/L	mg/dL	mmol/mol	DCCT %
Normal	< 7.8	< 140	< 6.1	< 110	< 42	< 6.0
Impaired fasting glycaemia	< 7.8	< 140	6.1–7.0	110–125	42–46	6.0–6.4
Impaired glucose tolerance	≥ 7.8	≥ 140	< 7.0	< 126	42–46	6.0–6.4
Diabetes mellitus	≥ 11.1	≥ 200	≥ 7.0	≥ 126	≥ 48	≥ 6.5
A positive result, in the absence of unequivocal high blood sugar, should be confirmed by a repeat of any of the above methods on a different day. It is preferable to measure a fasting glucose level because of the ease of measurement and the considerable time commitment of formal glucose tolerance testing, which takes two hours to complete and offers no prognostic advantage over the fasting test.[92] According to the current definition, two fasting glucose measurements at or above 7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL) is considered diagnostic for diabetes mellitus.

Per the WHO, people with fasting glucose levels from 6.1 to 6.9 mmol/L (110 to 125 mg/dL) are considered to have impaired fasting glucose.[93] People with plasma glucose at or above 7.8 mmol/L (140 mg/dL), but not over 11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL), two hours after a 75 gram oral glucose load are considered to have impaired glucose tolerance. Of these two prediabetic states, the latter in particular is a major risk factor for progression to full-blown diabetes mellitus, as well as cardiovascular disease.[94] The American Diabetes Association (ADA) since 2003 uses a slightly different range for impaired fasting glucose of 5.6 to 6.9 mmol/L (100 to 125 mg/dL).[95]

Glycated hemoglobin is better than fasting glucose for determining risks of cardiovascular disease and death from any cause.[96]

Prevention
See also: Prevention of type 2 diabetes
There is no known preventive measure for type 1 diabetes.[2] However, islet autoimmunity and multiple antibodies can be a strong predictor of the onset of type 1 diabetes.[97] Type 2 diabetes—which accounts for 85–90% of all cases worldwide—can often be prevented or delayed[98] by maintaining a normal body weight, engaging in physical activity, and eating a healthy diet.[2] Higher levels of physical activity (more than 90 minutes per day) reduce the risk of diabetes by 28%.[99] Dietary changes known to be effective in helping to prevent diabetes include maintaining a diet rich in whole grains and fiber, and choosing good fats, such as the polyunsaturated fats found in nuts, vegetable oils, and fish.[100] Limiting sugary beverages and eating less red meat and other sources of saturated fat can also help prevent diabetes.[100] Tobacco smoking is also associated with an increased risk of diabetes and its complications, so smoking cessation can be an important preventive measure as well.[101]

The relationship between type 2 diabetes and the main modifiable risk factors (excess weight, unhealthy diet, physical inactivity and tobacco use) is similar in all regions of the world. There is growing evidence that the underlying determinants of diabetes are a reflection of the major forces driving social, economic and cultural change: globalization, urbanization, population aging, and the general health policy environment.[102]

Comorbidity
Diabetes patients' comorbidities have a significant impact on medical expenses and related costs. It has been demonstrated that patients with diabetes are more likely to experience respiratory, urinary tract, and skin infections, develop atherosclerosis, hypertension, and chronic kidney disease, putting them at increased risk of infection and complications that require medical attention.[103] Patients with diabetes mellitus are more likely to experience certain infections, such as COVID-19, with prevalence rates ranging from 5.3 to 35.5%.[104][105] Maintaining adequate glycemic control is the primary goal of diabetes management since it is critical to managing diabetes and preventing or postponing such complications.[106]

People with type 1 diabetes have higher rates of autoimmune disorders than the general population. An analysis of a type 1 diabetes registry found that 27% of the 25,000 participants had other autoimmune disorders.[107] Between 2% and 16% of people with type 1 diabetes also have celiac disease.[107]

Management
Main article: Diabetes management
Diabetes management concentrates on keeping blood sugar levels close to normal, without causing low blood sugar.[108] This can usually be accomplished with dietary changes,[109] exercise, weight loss, and use of appropriate medications (insulin, oral medications).[108]

Learning about the disease and actively participating in the treatment is important, since complications are far less common and less severe in people who have well-managed blood sugar levels.[108][110] The goal of treatment is an A1C level below 7%.[111][112] Attention is also paid to other health problems that may accelerate the negative effects of diabetes. These include smoking, high blood pressure, metabolic syndrome obesity, and lack of regular exercise.[108][113] Specialized footwear is widely used to reduce the risk of diabetic foot ulcers by relieving the pressure on the foot.[114][115][116] Foot examination for patients living with diabetes should be done annually which includes sensation testing, foot biomechanics, vascular integrity and foot structure.[117]

Concerning those with severe mental illness, the efficacy of type 2 diabetes self-management interventions is still poorly explored, with insufficient scientific evidence to show whether these interventions have similar results to those observed in the general population.[118]

Lifestyle
See also: Diet in diabetes
People with diabetes can benefit from education about the disease and treatment, dietary changes, and exercise, with the goal of keeping both short-term and long-term blood glucose levels within acceptable bounds. In addition, given the associated higher risks of cardiovascular disease, lifestyle modifications are recommended to control blood pressure.[119][120]

Weight loss can prevent progression from prediabetes to diabetes type 2, decrease the risk of cardiovascular disease, or result in a partial remission in people with diabetes.[121][122] No single dietary pattern is best for all people with diabetes.[123] Healthy dietary patterns, such as the Mediterranean diet, low-carbohydrate diet, or DASH diet, are often recommended, although evidence does not support one over the others.[121][122] According to the ADA, "reducing overall carbohydrate intake for individuals with diabetes has demonstrated the most evidence for improving glycemia", and for individuals with type 2 diabetes who cannot meet the glycemic targets or where reducing anti-glycemic medications is a priority, low or very-low carbohydrate diets are a viable approach.[122] For overweight people with type 2 diabetes, any diet that achieves weight loss is effective.[123][124]

A 2020 Cochrane systematic review compared several non-nutritive sweeteners to sugar, placebo and a nutritive low-calorie sweetener (tagatose), but the results were unclear for effects on HbA1c, body weight and adverse events.[125] The studies included were mainly of very low-certainty and did not report on health-related quality of life, diabetes complications, all-cause mortality or socioeconomic effects.[125]

Diabetes and youth
Youth dealing with diabetes face unique challenges. These can include the emotional, psychological, and social implications as a result of managing a chronic condition at such a young age. Both forms of diabetes can have long-term risks for complications like cardiovascular disease, kidney damage, and nerve damage. This is why early intervention and impactful management important to improving long-term health. Physical activity plays a vital role in managing diabetes, improving glycemic control, and enhancing the overall quality of life for children and adolescents.

Younger children and adolescents with T1D tend to be more physically active compared to older individuals. This possibly because of the more demanding schedules and sedentary lifestyles of older adolescents, who are often in high school or university. This age-related decrease in physical activity is a potential challenge to keeping up with the ideal healthy lifestyle. [126] People who have had T1D for a longer amount of time also have a tendency to be less active. As diabetes progresses, people may face more barriers to engaging in physical activity. Examples of this could include anxiety about experiencing hypoglycemic events during exercise or the physical challenges posed by the long-term complications that diabetes cause. Increased physical activity in youth with T1D can be associated with improved health. These outcomes can include better lipid profiles (higher HDL-C and lower triglycerides), healthier body composition (reduced waist circumference and BMI), and improved overall physical health. These benefits are especially important during childhood and adolescence because this is when proper growth and development are occurring.

Younger people with type 2 diabetes have a tendency to have lower levels of physical activity and CRF compared to their peers without diabetes. This contributes to their poorer overall health and increases the risk of cardiovascular and metabolic complications.[127] Despite recommendations for physical activity as part of diabetes management, many youth and young adolesents with type 2 diabetes do not meet the guidelines, hindering their ability to effectively manage blood glucose levels and improve their health. CRF is a key health indicator. Higher levels of CRF is associated with better health outcomes. This means that increasing CRF through exercise can provide important benefits for managing type 2 diabetes. There is a need for targeted interventions that promote physical activity and improve CRF in youth with type 2 diabetes to help reduce the risk of long-term complications.

When it comes to resistance training, it is found to have no significant effect on insulin sensitivity in children and adolescents, despite it having positive trends. [128] Intervention length, training intensity, and the participants' physical maturation might explain the mixed results. Longer and higher-intensity programs showed more promising results. Future research could focus on more dire metabolic conditions like type II diabetes, investigate the role of physical maturation, and think about including longer intervention periods. While resistance training complements aerobic exercise, its standalone effects on insulin sensitivity remain unclear.

Medications
Main article: Diabetes medication
Glucose control
See also: Anti-diabetic medication
Most medications used to treat diabetes act by lowering blood sugar levels through different mechanisms. There is broad consensus that when people with diabetes maintain tight glucose control – keeping the glucose levels in their blood within normal ranges – they experience fewer complications, such as kidney problems or eye problems.[129][130] There is, however, debate as to whether this is appropriate and cost effective for people later in life in whom the risk of hypoglycemia may be more significant.[131]

There are a number of different classes of anti-diabetic medications. Type 1 diabetes requires treatment with insulin, ideally using a "basal bolus" regimen that most closely matches normal insulin release: long-acting insulin for the basal rate and short-acting insulin with meals.[132] Type 2 diabetes is generally treated with medication that is taken by mouth (e.g. metformin) although some eventually require injectable treatment with insulin or GLP-1 agonists.[133]

Metformin is generally recommended as a first-line treatment for type 2 diabetes, as there is good evidence that it decreases mortality.[7] It works by decreasing the liver's production of glucose, and increasing the amount of glucose stored in peripheral tissue.[134] Several other groups of drugs, mainly oral medication, may also decrease blood sugar in type 2 diabetes. These include agents that increase insulin release (sulfonylureas), agents that decrease absorption of sugar from the intestines (acarbose), agents that inhibit the enzyme dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) that inactivates incretins such as GLP-1 and GIP (sitagliptin), agents that make the body more sensitive to insulin (thiazolidinedione) and agents that increase the excretion of glucose in the urine (SGLT2 inhibitors).[134] When insulin is used in type 2 diabetes, a long-acting formulation is usually added initially, while continuing oral medications.[7]

Some severe cases of type 2 diabetes may also be treated with insulin, which is increased gradually until glucose targets are reached.[7][135]

Blood pressure lowering
Cardiovascular disease is a serious complication associated with diabetes, and many international guidelines recommend blood pressure treatment targets that are lower than 140/90 mmHg for people with diabetes.[136] However, there is only limited evidence regarding what the lower targets should be. A 2016 systematic review found potential harm to treating to targets lower than 140 mmHg,[137] and a subsequent systematic review in 2019 found no evidence of additional benefit from blood pressure lowering to between 130 – 140mmHg, although there was an increased risk of adverse events.[138]

2015 American Diabetes Association recommendations are that people with diabetes and albuminuria should receive an inhibitor of the renin-angiotensin system to reduce the risks of progression to end-stage renal disease, cardiovascular events, and death.[139] There is some evidence that angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs) are superior to other inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system such as angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs),[140] or aliskiren in preventing cardiovascular disease.[141] Although a more recent review found similar effects of ACEIs and ARBs on major cardiovascular and renal outcomes.[142] There is no evidence that combining ACEIs and ARBs provides additional benefits.[142]

Aspirin
The use of aspirin to prevent cardiovascular disease in diabetes is controversial.[139] Aspirin is recommended by some in people at high risk of cardiovascular disease; however, routine use of aspirin has not been found to improve outcomes in uncomplicated diabetes.[143] 2015 American Diabetes Association recommendations for aspirin use (based on expert consensus or clinical experience) are that low-dose aspirin use is reasonable in adults with diabetes who are at intermediate risk of cardiovascular disease (10-year cardiovascular disease risk, 5–10%).[139] National guidelines for England and Wales by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommend against the use of aspirin in people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes who do not have confirmed cardiovascular disease.[132][133]

Surgery
Weight loss surgery in those with obesity and type 2 diabetes is often an effective measure.[144] Many are able to maintain normal blood sugar levels with little or no medications following surgery[145] and long-term mortality is decreased.[146] There is, however, a short-term mortality risk of less than 1% from the surgery.[147] The body mass index cutoffs for when surgery is appropriate are not yet clear.[146] It is recommended that this option be considered in those who are unable to get both their weight and blood sugar under control.[148]

A pancreas transplant is occasionally considered for people with type 1 diabetes who have severe complications of their disease, including end stage kidney disease requiring kidney transplantation.[149]

Diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN) affects 30% of all diabetes patients.[150] When DPN is superimposed with nerve compression, DPN may be treatable with multiple nerve decompressions.[151][152] The theory is that DPN predisposes peripheral nerves to compression at anatomical sites of narrowing, and that the majority of DPN symptoms are actually attributable to nerve compression, a treatable condition, rather than DPN itself.[153][154] The surgery is associated with lower pain scores, higher two-point discrimination (a measure of sensory improvement), lower rate of ulcerations, fewer falls (in the case of lower extremity decompression), and fewer amputations.[154][155][156][152]

Self-management and support
In countries using a general practitioner system, such as the United Kingdom, care may take place mainly outside hospitals, with hospital-based specialist care used only in case of complications, difficult blood sugar control, or research projects. In other circumstances, general practitioners and specialists share care in a team approach. Evidence has shown that social prescribing led to slight improvements in blood sugar control for people with type 2 diabetes.[157] Home telehealth support can be an effective management technique.[158]

The use of technology to deliver educational programs for adults with type 2 diabetes includes computer-based self-management interventions to collect for tailored responses to facilitate self-management.[159] There is no adequate evidence to support effects on cholesterol, blood pressure, behavioral change (such as physical activity levels and dietary), depression, weight and health-related quality of life, nor in other biological, cognitive or emotional outcomes.[159][160]

Epidemiology
Main article: Epidemiology of diabetes

Rates of diabetes worldwide in 2014. The worldwide prevalence was 9.2%.

Mortality rate of diabetes worldwide in 2012 per million inhabitants
  28–91
  92–114
  115–141
  142–163
  164–184
  185–209
  210–247
  248–309
  310–404
  405–1879
An estimated 382 million people worldwide had diabetes in 2013[161] up from 108 million in 1980.[162] Accounting for the shifting age structure of the global population, the prevalence of diabetes is 8.8% among adults, nearly double the rate of 4.7% in 1980.[163][162] Type 2 makes up about 90% of the cases.[19][39] Some data indicate rates are roughly equal in women and men,[19] but male excess in diabetes has been found in many populations with higher type 2 incidence, possibly due to sex-related differences in insulin sensitivity, consequences of obesity and regional body fat deposition, and other contributing factors such as high blood pressure, tobacco smoking, and alcohol intake.[164][165]

The WHO estimates that diabetes resulted in 1.5 million deaths in 2012, making it the 8th leading cause of death.[166][162] However, another 2.2 million deaths worldwide were attributable to high blood glucose and the increased risks of cardiovascular disease and other associated complications (e.g. kidney failure), which often lead to premature death and are often listed as the underlying cause on death certificates rather than diabetes.[162][167] For example, in 2017, the International Diabetes Federation (IDF) estimated that diabetes resulted in 4.0 million deaths worldwide,[163] using modeling to estimate the total number of deaths that could be directly or indirectly attributed to diabetes.[163]

Diabetes occurs throughout the world but is more common (especially type 2) in more developed countries. The greatest increase in rates has, however, been seen in low- and middle-income countries,[162] where more than 80% of diabetic deaths occur.[168] The fastest prevalence increase is expected to occur in Asia and Africa, where most people with diabetes will probably live in 2030.[169] The increase in rates in developing countries follows the trend of urbanization and lifestyle changes, including increasingly sedentary lifestyles, less physically demanding work and the global nutrition transition, marked by increased intake of foods that are high energy-dense but nutrient-poor (often high in sugar and saturated fats, sometimes referred to as the "Western-style" diet).[162][169] The global number of diabetes cases might increase by 48% between 2017 and 2045.[163]

As of 2020, 38% of all US adults had prediabetes.[170] Prediabetes is an early stage of diabetes.

History
Main article: History of diabetes
Diabetes was one of the first diseases described,[171] with an Egyptian manuscript from c. 1500 BCE mentioning "too great emptying of the urine."[172] The Ebers papyrus includes a recommendation for a drink to take in such cases.[173] The first described cases are believed to have been type 1 diabetes.[172] Indian physicians around the same time identified the disease and classified it as madhumeha or "honey urine", noting the urine would attract ants.[172][173]

The term "diabetes" or "to pass through" was first used in 230 BCE by the Greek Apollonius of Memphis.[172] The disease was considered rare during the time of the Roman empire, with Galen commenting he had only seen two cases during his career.[172] This is possibly due to the diet and lifestyle of the ancients, or because the clinical symptoms were observed during the advanced stage of the disease. Galen named the disease "diarrhea of the urine" (diarrhea urinosa).[174]

The earliest surviving work with a detailed reference to diabetes is that of Aretaeus of Cappadocia (2nd or early 3rd century CE). He described the symptoms and the course of the disease, which he attributed to the moisture and coldness, reflecting the beliefs of the "Pneumatic School". He hypothesized a correlation between diabetes and other diseases, and he discussed differential diagnosis from the snakebite, which also provokes excessive thirst. His work remained unknown in the West until 1552, when the first Latin edition was published in Venice.[174]

Two types of diabetes were identified as separate conditions for the first time by the Indian physicians Sushruta and Charaka in 400–500 CE with one type being associated with youth and another type with being overweight.[172] Effective treatment was not developed until the early part of the 20th century when Canadians Frederick Banting and Charles Best isolated and purified insulin in 1921 and 1922.[172] This was followed by the development of the long-acting insulin NPH in the 1940s.[172]

Etymology
The word diabetes (/ˌdaɪ.əˈbiːtiːz/ or /ˌdaɪ.əˈbiːtɪs/) comes from Latin diabētēs, which in turn comes from Ancient Greek διαβήτης (diabētēs), which literally means "a passer through; a siphon".[175] Ancient Greek physician Aretaeus of Cappadocia (fl. 1st century CE) used that word, with the intended meaning "excessive discharge of urine", as the name for the disease.[176][177] Ultimately, the word comes from Greek διαβαίνειν (diabainein), meaning "to pass through",[175] which is composed of δια- (dia-), meaning "through" and βαίνειν (bainein), meaning "to go".[176] The word "diabetes" is first recorded in English, in the form diabete, in a medical text written around 1425.

The word mellitus (/məˈlaɪtəs/ or /ˈmɛlɪtəs/) comes from the classical Latin word mellītus, meaning "mellite"[178] (i.e. sweetened with honey;[178] honey-sweet[179]). The Latin word comes from mell-, which comes from mel, meaning "honey";[178][179] sweetness;[179] pleasant thing,[179] and the suffix -ītus,[178] whose meaning is the same as that of the English suffix "-ite".[180] It was Thomas Willis who in 1675 added "mellitus" to the word "diabetes" as a designation for the disease, when he noticed the urine of a person with diabetes had a sweet taste (glycosuria). This sweet taste had been noticed in urine by the ancient Greeks, Chinese, Egyptians, and Indians.[181]

Society and culture
Further information: List of films featuring diabetes
The 1989 "St. Vincent Declaration"[182][183] was the result of international efforts to improve the care accorded to those with diabetes. Doing so is important not only in terms of quality of life and life expectancy but also economically – expenses due to diabetes have been shown to be a major drain on health – and productivity-related resources for healthcare systems and governments.

Several countries established more and less successful national diabetes programmes to improve treatment of the disease.[184]

Diabetes stigma
Diabetes stigma describes the negative attitudes, judgment, discrimination, or prejudice against people with diabetes. Often, the stigma stems from the idea that diabetes (particularly Type 2 diabetes) resulted from poor lifestyle and unhealthy food choices rather than other causal factors such as genetics and social determinants of health.[185] Manifestation of stigma can be seen throughout different cultures and contexts. Scenarios include diabetes statuses affecting marriage proposals, workplace-employment, and social standing in communities.[186]

Stigma is also seen internally, as people with diabetes can also have negative beliefs about themselves. Often these cases of self-stigma are associated with higher diabetes-specific distress, lower self-efficacy, higher rates of depression, and poorer provider-patient interactions during diabetes care.[187]

Racial and economic inequalities
Racial and ethnic minorities are disproportionately affected with higher prevalence of diabetes compared to non-minority individuals.[188] While US adults overall have a 40% chance of developing type 2 diabetes, Hispanic/Latino adults chance is more than 50%.[189] African Americans also are much more likely to be diagnosed with diabetes compared to White Americans. Asians have increased risk of diabetes as diabetes can develop at lower BMI due to differences in visceral fat compared to other races. For Asians, diabetes can develop at a younger age and lower body fat compared to other groups. Additionally, diabetes is highly underreported in Asian American people, as 1 in 3 cases are undiagnosed compared to the average 1 in 5 for the nation.[190]

People with diabetes who have neuropathic symptoms such as numbness or tingling in feet or hands are twice as likely to be unemployed as those without the symptoms.[191]

In 2010, diabetes-related emergency room (ER) visit rates in the United States were higher among people from the lowest income communities (526 per 10,000 population) than from the highest income communities (236 per 10,000 population). Approximately 9.4% of diabetes-related ER visits were for the uninsured.[192]

Naming
The term "type 1 diabetes" has replaced several former terms, including childhood-onset diabetes, juvenile diabetes, and insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Likewise, the term "type 2 diabetes" has replaced several former terms, including adult-onset diabetes, obesity-related diabetes, and noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Beyond these two types, there is no agreed-upon standard nomenclature.[193]

Diabetes mellitus is also occasionally known as "sugar diabetes" to differentiate it from diabetes insipidus.[194] Diabetes insipidus is an unrelated disease with symptoms that can mimic diabetes mellitus.

Other animals
Main articles: Diabetes in dogs and Diabetes in cats
Diabetes can occur in mammals or reptiles.[195][196] Birds do not develop diabetes because of their unusually high tolerance for elevated blood glucose levels.[197] There is some indication that amphibians have the ability to develop diabetes.[198]

In animals, diabetes is most commonly encountered in dogs and cats. Middle-aged animals are most commonly affected. Female dogs are twice as likely to be affected as males, while according to some sources, male cats are more prone than females. In both species, all breeds may be affected, but some small dog breeds are particularly likely to develop diabetes, such as Miniature Poodles.[199]

Feline diabetes is strikingly similar to human type 2 diabetes. The Burmese, Russian Blue, Abyssinian, and Norwegian Forest cat breeds are at higher risk than other breeds. Overweight cats are also at higher risk.[200]

The symptoms may relate to fluid loss and polyuria, but the course may also be insidious. Diabetic animals are more prone to infections. The long-term complications recognized in humans are much rarer in animals. The principles of treatment (weight loss, oral antidiabetics, subcutaneous insulin) and management of emergencies (e.g. ketoacidosis) are similar to those in humans.[199]  Preventing Diabetes Problems

View or Print All Sections
Heart Disease & Stroke
Diabetes can damage blood vessels and lead to heart disease and stroke. You can do a lot to prevent heart disease and stroke by managing your blood glucose, blood pressure, and cholesterol levels; and by not smoking.

Low Blood Glucose (Hypoglycemia)
Hypoglycemia occurs when your blood glucose drops too low. Certain diabetes medicines make low blood glucose more likely. You can prevent hypoglycemia by following your meal plan and balancing your physical activity, food, and medicines. Testing your blood glucose regularly can also help prevent hypoglycemia.

Diabetic Neuropathy
Diabetic neuropathy is nerve damage that can result from diabetes. Different types of nerve damage affect different parts of your body. Managing your diabetes can help prevent nerve damage that affects your feet and limbs, and organs such as your heart.

Kidney Disease
Diabetic kidney disease, also called diabetic nephropathy, is kidney disease caused by diabetes. You can help protect your kidneys by managing your diabetes and meeting your blood pressure goals.

Foot Problems
Diabetes can cause nerve damage and poor blood flow, which can lead to serious foot problems. Common foot problems, such as a callus, can lead to pain or an infection that makes it hard to walk. Get a foot checkup at each visit with your health care team.

Eye Disease
Diabetes can damage your eyes and lead to low vision and blindness. The best way to prevent eye disease is to manage your blood glucose, blood pressure, and cholesterol; and to not smoke. Also, have a dilated eye exam at least once a year.

Gum Disease & Other Dental Problems
Diabetes can lead to problems in your mouth, such as infection, gum disease, or dry mouth. To help keep your mouth healthy, manage your blood glucose, brush your teeth twice a day, see your dentist at least once a year, and don’t smoke.

Sexual & Bladder Problems
Sexual and bladder problems are more common in people with diabetes. Problems like erectile dysfunction, loss of interest in sex, bladder leaks, and retained urine can happen if diabetes damages your blood vessels and nerves. Treatments are available to help control symptoms and restore intimacy.

Depression & Diabetes
Depression NIH external link is common among people with a chronic, or long-term, illness such as diabetes. Depression can be treated so tell your doctor if you feel sad, hopeless, or anxious.

Cancer & Diabetes
Diabetes is linked to some types of cancer External link. Many risk factors for cancer and for diabetes are the same. Not smoking and getting recommended cancer screenings can help prevent cancer.

Dementia & Diabetes
High blood glucose increases the chance of developing dementia NIH external link. Tell your doctor if you are forgetful because dementia can make it hard to manage your diabetes.

Sleep Apnea & Diabetes
People who have sleep apnea NIH external link—when you stop breathing for short periods during sleep—are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes. Sleep apnea also can make diabetes worse. Treatment for sleep apnea can help.Symptoms & Causes of Diabetes
In this section:

What are the symptoms of diabetes?
What causes type 1 diabetes?
What causes type 2 diabetes?
What causes gestational diabetes?
What else can cause diabetes?
Clinical Trials for Symptoms and Causes of Diabetes
What are the symptoms of diabetes?
Common symptoms of diabetes include

increased urination
feeling very thirsty
feeling very hungry, even after you have eaten
blurred vision
fatigue
sores that do not heal
frequent infections, such as urinary tract infections, skin infections NIH external link, or yeast infections NIH external link
There are different types of diabetes. People with any type of diabetes can have these symptoms. Some other symptoms, and how quickly the symptoms develop, depend on the type of diabetes that you have. Talk with your primary health care professional about any symptoms you are having and ask if you should be tested for diabetes. Your primary health care professional may be a doctor, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner.

Type 1 diabetes symptoms
In addition to some of the common diabetes symptoms listed above, people with type 1 diabetes may also have an unexplained weight loss. Most people don’t know they have type 1 diabetes until they develop diabetes symptoms.

Symptoms of type 1 diabetes usually develop quickly, over a few days or weeks. Type 1 diabetes is often diagnosed in children and young adults, but it can begin at any age. Children with type 1 diabetes typically develop symptoms over a short period of time. Common symptoms of type diabetes in children include

having to urinate more often
eating more but losing weight
feeling very thirsty
These symptoms are less common in adults with type 1 diabetes. For some adults, symptoms of type 1 diabetes may develop slowly and seem more like type 2 diabetes. Some adults who develop diabetes may need special tests to find out what type of diabetes they have. Talk with your health care professional about the type of diabetes you may have. They can help you understand its causes and treatments.

Sometimes, people find out they have type 1 diabetes when they have signs and symptoms of a condition called diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) External link. Symptoms of DKA may include

feeling very tired
having trouble breathing
having fruity-smelling breath
fainting from dehydration
having pain in your abdomen, nausea, or vomiting
If you have type 1 diabetes, your body doesn’t have enough insulin to use blood glucose—also called blood sugar—for energy. Your body will begin to use fat as a source of energy instead. This process produces substances called ketones. High levels of ketones can cause DKA, which is a medical emergency that needs to be treated right away.

DKA usually affects people with type 1 diabetes. People with type 2 diabetes may also develop DKA if their body doesn’t produce enough insulin.

Type 2 diabetes symptoms
Symptoms of type 2 diabetes can develop slowly, over several years. Many people with type 2 diabetes have no symptoms, or symptoms can be so mild that people might not even notice them. In addition to the common symptoms of diabetes listed above, people may find out they have type 2 diabetes when they develop symptoms of other health problems from diabetes. These include

pain, numbness, or tingling in the feet or hands
sexual problems
chest pain NIH external link
vision loss
An older adult receiving an eye exam.
Vision loss can be a symptom of diabetes.
Gestational diabetes symptoms
Gestational diabetes is a type of diabetes that may develop when you are pregnant. Most people with this type of diabetes have no symptoms. If you do have symptoms of gestational diabetes, they may be mild, such as being thirstier than usual or having to urinate more often.

People with a history of gestational diabetes are at higher risk of developing type 2 diabetes later in life. If you have a history of gestational diabetes, your health care professional may recommend regular testing for type 2 diabetes.

What causes type 1 diabetes?
Type 1 diabetes develops when the body’s immune system NIH external link destroys the cells in the pancreas that make insulin. These cells are called beta cells. Genes and factors in the environment—the places where people live, play, work, study, and gather—may trigger the immune system to destroy beta cells in type 1 diabetes.

Insulin is a hormone that helps blood glucose get into the body’s cells to be used as energy. When your body doesn’t have enough insulin, glucose in your blood can’t get into the cells. As a result, your cells lack energy, your blood glucose level rises, and you develop diabetes.

Studies such as The Environmental Determinants of Diabetes in the Young (TEDDY) External link are trying to learn more about the causes of type 1 diabetes. Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet External link and other groups are working to find treatments that may prevent or slow the development of type 1 diabetes in people who are at risk for getting the disease.

What causes type 2 diabetes?
Type 2 diabetes is the most common form of diabetes. Type 2 diabetes develops when your pancreas doesn’t produce enough insulin, and your body has trouble using insulin, a condition called insulin resistance. Insulin resistance is when the cells in your muscles, fat, and liver don’t respond well to insulin. When there isn’t enough insulin to balance blood glucose levels, they begin to rise.

When blood glucose levels are higher than normal but not high enough to be diagnosed as type 2 diabetes, you have a condition called prediabetes. You have type 2 diabetes when health care professionals diagnose your blood glucose level as being too high.

Researchers don’t fully know what causes problems with insulin production and insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes. However, people are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes if they

have overweight, obesity, or a large waist size.
are age 35 or older. Children and teens can also develop type 2 diabetes, but the risk increases as a person gets older.
have a family history of type 2 diabetes.
are African American, American Indian, Asian American, Hispanic, Latino, or Pacific Islander.
are not physically active, because of a job that requires sitting for long periods of time or because of difficulty moving their body.
smoke External link, including tobacco products and e-cigarettes External link, or are exposed to secondhand smoke External link.
have prediabetes.
have a history of gestational diabetes, a type of diabetes that develops during pregnancy, or gave birth to a baby weighing 9 pounds or more.
You can’t change some of these risk factors, such as your age, family history, or race. However, you may be able to change some risk factors and prevent or delay type 2 diabetes by maintaining a healthy weight, being physically active, and stopping smoking.

Father and daughter dancing together.
You may be able to prevent type 2 diabetes by maintaining a healthy weight and being physically active.

What causes gestational diabetes?
Gestational diabetes occurs when your body can’t make the extra insulin that you need during pregnancy. Scientists believe that substances made in your body, called hormones, may play a role in causing this form of diabetes.

Changes to hormones during pregnancy can make it harder for blood glucose to enter the cells in your body. This causes insulin resistance. In most pregnancies, the pancreas can make enough insulin to overcome these changes. If the pancreas can’t make enough insulin, you’ll develop gestational diabetes.

You’re more likely to develop gestational diabetes if you have certain risk factors, such as

having overweight or obesity
gaining too much weight during pregnancy
having a family history of gestational diabetes, type 2 diabetes, or both
What else can cause diabetes?
Other causes of diabetes may include

diseases caused by changes in your genes, also called gene variants
endocrine diseases
damage to or removal of the pancreas
taking certain medicines
Diseases caused by changes in your genes
Gene variants NIH external link are changes to certain genes. Some gene variants can cause diseases that can affect the pancreas and lead to diabetes.

Monogenic diabetes
Monogenic diabetes is a group of rare forms of diabetes caused by a variant, or change, in a single gene. Parents may pass these gene variants to their children. In some cases, a person may be the first one with the variant in the family. Most forms of monogenic diabetes reduce the amount of insulin your pancreas can make.

Cystic fibrosis
Cystic fibrosis NIH external link is a genetic disease that leads to swelling and scarring in the pancreas. This scarring can prevent the pancreas from making enough insulin.

Hemochromatosis
Hemochromatosis is a genetic condition that causes your body and organs to build up harmful levels of iron NIH external link. If the disease is not treated, high levels of iron may damage your pancreas and other organs.

Endocrine diseases
Some endocrine diseases make the body produce too much of certain hormones. High levels of these hormones may cause insulin resistance or diabetes. Endocrine diseases that may cause insulin resistance or diabetes include

Cushing’s syndrome, which can cause the body to produce too much cortisol—often called the “stress hormone”
acromegaly, which can cause the body to produce too much growth hormone
hyperthyroidism, which can cause the body to produce too much thyroid hormone
hypothyroidism, which can cause the body to produce too little thyroid hormone
Damage to or removal of the pancreas
The pancreas can be damaged by injury or diseases such as inflammation of the pancreas, also called pancreatitis. Diabetes may be the first sign of pancreatic cancer NIH external link in older people without diabetes risk factors who develop diabetes. A damaged pancreas may make less insulin and lead to diabetes. In some cases, your pancreas may need to be removed. Without a pancreas, your body can’t produce insulin. You’ll develop diabetes and will have to take insulin.

Taking certain medicines
Certain medicines may harm the pancreas or affect the way insulin works in the body. Some of these medicines may include

antipsychotics NIH external link that are used to treat certain mental health problems
antiseizure medicines that are used to treat epilepsy NIH external link
beta-blockers and diuretics NIH external link that are used to treat high blood pressure
glucocorticoids NIH external link that are used to treat certain inflammatory diseases
immunosuppressants that are used after an organ transplant
niacin NIH external link, a type of vitamin B that is sometimes used to treat high blood cholesterol
Statins, which are medicines to reduce LDL (“bad”) cholesterol levels, can slightly increase the chance that you’ll develop diabetes. However, statins help protect you from heart disease NIH external link and stroke NIH external link. For this reason, the strong benefits of taking statins outweigh the small chance that you could develop diabetes.

If you take medicines for these conditions, you may want to ask your primary health care professional if your medicines could affect your risk of developing diabetes.

Clinical Trials for Symptoms and Causes of Diabetes
NIDDK conducts and supports clinical trials in many diseases and conditions, including diabetes. The trials look to find new ways to prevent, detect, or treat diseases and improve quality of life.

What clinical trials study symptoms and causes of diabetes?
Clinical trials—and other types of clinical studies NIH external link—are part of medical research and involve people like you. When you volunteer to take part in a clinical study, you help doctors and researchers learn more about disease and improve health care for people in the future.

Researchers are studying many aspects of symptoms and causes of diabetes, such as

tests and treatments for rare and uncommon types of diabetes
body changes in people who develop diabetes after having pancreatitis
Find out if clinical trials are right for you NIH external link.

Watch a video of NIDDK Director Dr. Griffin P. Rodgers explaining the importance of participating in clinical trials.


What clinical trials about symptoms and causes of diabetes are looking for participants?
You can find clinical studies on symptoms and causes of diabetes at ClinicalTrials.gov NIH external link. In addition to searching for federally funded studies, you can expand or narrow your search to include clinical studies from industry, universities, and individuals; however, the National Institutes of Health does not review these studies and cannot ensure they are safe for you. Always talk with your primary health care professional before you participate in a clinical study.

What have we learned about symptoms and causes of diabetes from NIDDK-funded research?
NIDDK has funded many research projects to learn more about symptoms and causes of diabetes.

NIDDK-supported research helped scientists find genes linked to type 1 diabetes and new ways to identify people with type 1 diabetes before they develop symptoms.
NIDDK also supported research to test medicines in people with type 1 diabetes before symptoms develop and before they require insulin-replacement therapy. In 2022, this research led to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval of a medicine External link (PDF, 101.1 KB)  that may slow damage to the pancreas in early stages of type 1 diabetes.
The Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) studied how to prevent or delay disease in people at high risk of developing type 2 diabetes. The study found that participants who did regular physical activity and lost 5% to 7% of their body weight lowered their chance of developing type 2 diabetes.
NIDDK funds the Glycemic Observation and Metabolic Outcomes in Mothers and Offspring (GO MOMS) External link study, which is investigating ways to improve gestational diabetes screening and diagnosis by better understanding blood glucose levels throughout pregnancy. GO MOMs will set the foundation for future ways to screen, diagnose, and treat high blood glucose levels during pregnancy.
NIDDK supports the Rare and Atypical Diabetes Network (RADIANT) External link study, which is looking at ways to identify and define rare and atypical forms of diabetes.
NIDDK formed the Type 1 Diabetes in Acute Pancreatitis Consortium (T1DAPC) External link to study type 1 diabetes and other types of diabetes that are related to acute pancreatitis. As part of this group, the Diabetes Related to Acute Pancreatitis and Its Mechanisms (DREAM) study is looking at people with recent acute pancreatitis to see how many develop diabetes.
Last Reviewed October 2024Gestational Diabetes

View or Print All Sections
Definition & Facts
Gestational diabetes is a type of diabetes that occurs only during pregnancy. Gestational diabetes can cause health problems in both mother and baby. Managing your diabetes can help protect you and your baby.

Pregnant woman preparing meal with son from fresh vegetables
Symptoms & Causes
Gestational diabetes often has no symptoms, or they may be mild, such as being thirstier than normal or having to urinate more often. Gestational diabetes is sometimes related to the hormonal changes of pregnancy that make your body less able to use insulin. Genes and extra weight may also play a role.

Tests & Diagnosis
Your doctor will test you for gestational diabetes between 24 and 28 weeks of pregnancy. Tests include the glucose challenge test and the oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). If the results of the glucose challenge test show high blood glucose, you will return for an OGTT test to confirm the diagnosis of gestational diabetes.

Management & Treatment
Managing gestational diabetes includes following a healthy eating plan and being physically active. If your eating plan and physical activity aren’t enough to keep your blood glucose in your target range, you may need insulin.

Prevention
You can lower your chance of getting gestational diabetes by losing extra weight before you get pregnant if you are overweight. Being physically active before and during pregnancy also may help prevent gestational diabetes.

After Your Baby is Born
If you had gestational diabetes, you are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes. Your child is more likely to have obesity or develop type 2 diabetes. You may be able to lower your and your child’s chances of developing these problems by reaching a healthy weight, making healthy food choices, and being physically active.

Related Conditions & Diseases
Health Tips for Pregnant Women
Type 2 Diabetes
Clinical Trials
The NIDDK and other components of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) support and conduct research into many diseases and conditions.

View clinical trials that are currently recruiting volunteers NIH external link.

Additional Languages
This content is also available in:

Spanish
Related Research
See more about diabetes research at NIDDK.Monogenic Diabetes (MODY & Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus)
On this page:

What is monogenic diabetes?
What is maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)?
What is neonatal diabetes mellitus (NDM)?
How common is monogenic diabetes?
Who is more likely to have monogenic diabetes?
What health problems can people with monogenic diabetes develop?
What are the symptoms of monogenic diabetes?
What causes monogenic diabetes?
How do health care professionals diagnose monogenic diabetes?
What do I need to know about genetic counseling?
How can I manage monogenic diabetes?
Can I prevent monogenic diabetes?
Clinical Trials for Monogenic Diabetes
What is monogenic diabetes?
Monogenic diabetes is a group of uncommon forms of diabetes that are caused by a variant NIH external link, or change, in a single gene. Researchers have found variants in more than 20 genes that cause monogenic diabetes.1 Monogenic forms of diabetes are part of the group of atypical diabetes. People with atypical forms of diabetes have symptoms and signs that are different than those of type 1 or type 2 diabetes.

If you have monogenic diabetes, you may have high levels of blood glucose, also called blood sugar. Diabetes may raise your risk of eye, kidney, nerve, and heart damage. Diabetes is also linked to some types of cancer. You may be able to prevent or delay diabetes health problems by managing your blood glucose level.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and neonatal diabetes mellitus (NDM) are the two main forms of monogenic diabetes.

What is maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)?
MODY forms of diabetes usually develop in teens or young adults. People with some forms of MODY have blood glucose levels that are only a little higher than normal and do not change much during their lives. The levels of blood glucose are typically not high enough to damage their organs, so they may not need treatment. However, people with other forms of MODY have higher blood glucose levels and need treatment.

What is neonatal diabetes mellitus (NDM)?
NDM forms of diabetes develop in the first 6 to 12 months of life.2,3 Babies with forms of NDM do not produce enough insulin, which allows their blood glucose levels to go up more than normal. Babies who develop diabetes in the first 6 months of life almost always have a form of NDM.2

In most forms of NDM, babies will have lifelong diabetes. These forms of NDM are called permanent NDM. Babies with some forms of NDM have diabetes as infants, but their diabetes goes away during childhood. For these babies, diabetes often shows up again later in life. These forms of NDM are called transient NDM.

How common is monogenic diabetes?
Some research, mainly from the United States and Europe, has found that

about 1 to 5 of every 100 people with diabetes have monogenic diabetes4,5
NDM is a rare disease, and only 1 in every 90,000 babies has the disease4
People with monogenic diabetes may be misdiagnosed with type 1 or type 2 diabetes because the symptoms may be similar. Therefore, it is difficult to know how many people have monogenic diabetes.

Who is more likely to have monogenic diabetes?
People with MODY forms of diabetes usually have other family members with diabetes. MODY forms of diabetes most often occur in people ages 30 or younger.6 Forms of NDM most often occur in babies ages 6 months or younger.1,2 More studies are needed to understand which populations, based on race, are more affected by forms of MODY and NDM.

What health problems can people with monogenic diabetes develop?
Some people with forms of monogenic diabetes may develop the same diabetes health problems as people with other types of diabetes. High blood glucose levels from diabetes can damage every part of your body, including your

heart
kidneys
nerves
eyes
feet
teeth
If you have a form of monogenic diabetes, work with your primary health care professional, who may be a doctor, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner, to manage your diabetes. Your health care team can help you lower your chances of developing other health problems.

What are the symptoms of monogenic diabetes?
The symptoms of monogenic diabetes depend on which gene variant you have. Some people have no symptoms. Other people may have general symptoms of diabetes that include

increased urination
feeling thirsty
feeling very hungry, even after you have eaten
blurred vision
fatigue
numbness or tingling in the feet or hands
sores that do not heal
What causes monogenic diabetes?
A variant, or change, in a single gene causes monogenic diabetes.

You inherited genes—which determine things like your hair color, eye color, and height—from each of your parents. In most cases of MODY forms of diabetes, you inherit a gene from one or both parents that causes the disease.

Babies with NDM forms of diabetes rarely have a family history of the disease. Most cases of NDM are caused by a gene change that happens while a baby develops in the womb.

Most people with MODY forms of diabetes have inherited a gene for the disease from a parent who also had the disease. Diseases caused by a gene from one parent are called autosomal dominant NIH external link. If you have a form of NDM or MODY that is autosomal dominant, your child has a 50% chance of having the disease.

Some forms of NDM or MODY occur only if a child inherits a gene for the disease from both parents. In most cases, neither of the child’s parents had the disease. Diseases that occur only if you inherit a gene from both parents who don’t have the disease are called autosomal recessive NIH external link. If you inherit a gene for a recessive form of NDM or MODY from only one parent, you won’t have the disease. However, you can pass that gene to future generations.

Different gene variants cause monogenic diabetes in different ways. For example, gene variants may

affect how the pancreas develops
cause the pancreas to produce insulin that does not work well
destroy cells in the pancreas that produce insulin
How do health care professionals diagnose monogenic diabetes?
Your health care professional will usually test you for forms of monogenic diabetes if you have diabetes, are younger than 30 years old, don’t have overweight or obesity, and have family members with these forms of diabetes.

Health care professionals will diagnose diabetes using your symptoms, medical and family history, and diabetes tests. Your health care professional may also order tests to find out if your diabetes is type 1, type 2, or monogenic. The type of diabetes you have will help your health care professional determine how to treat the disease.

Blood glucose tests
Health care professionals can diagnose diabetes using blood tests that measure your glucose level to see if it is higher than normal. People with some forms of monogenic diabetes have blood glucose levels that are a little higher than normal.2

Blood glucose tests can help your health care professional tell if you have diabetes. However, these tests do not show the type of diabetes you have.

Autoantibodies
Your health care professional will order a test for autoantibodies to find out if you have type 1 diabetes. Autoantibodies are proteins made by your immune system that attack your healthy tissues and cells by mistake. In rare cases, people with monogenic diabetes may also have autoantibodies in their blood.

Genetic testing
Genetic testing NIH external link looks for gene variants. Health care professionals use genetic tests to diagnose monogenic diabetes.

Health care professionals may request a genetic test for2

babies ages 6 months or younger who develop diabetes
babies who develop diabetes between ages 6 months and 1 year and have some other medical problems
people who have diabetes at a young age, do not have overweight or obesity, and have a strong family history of diabetes
Young couple with a baby.
If you think you or a member of your family may have a monogenic form of diabetes, talk with your health care professional.
What do I need to know about genetic counseling?
If you, your partner, or family members have monogenic diabetes, you may want to consider genetic counseling NIH external link. Genetic counseling can help you decide if you should get tested for monogenic diabetes. Genetic counseling can also help you understand the risk of your children developing this disease. Talk with your health care professional for more information about how genetic counseling could help you, what it may cost, and whether it’s covered by your insurance.

How can I manage monogenic diabetes?
How you manage monogenic diabetes will depend on the specific gene variant you have. Your health care professional and diabetes care team will work with you to develop a plan to manage your diabetes. Your health care professional may refer you to, or work with, a medical center that focuses on monogenic diabetes to help manage the disease.

Medicines
Some people with monogenic diabetes may need diabetes medicines. These medicines may include

sulfonylureas, oral diabetes medicines that help your body make more insulin. These medicines can treat certain forms of MODY and NDM.
insulin. Some people with monogenic diabetes need to take insulin all their lives. Others may need to take insulin early in life and may be able to switch to sulfonylureas later in life.
other medicines. Some medicines, called sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors, work in your kidneys to get rid of glucose. Other medicines, called glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor (GLP-1) agonists, increase insulin production and decrease your appetite.
Diabetes medicines and office visits can be expensive. Talk with your health care professional or health care team if you are having trouble affording diabetes care. A health care professional, diabetes educator, or social worker may be able to tell you about resources that provide financial help for diabetes care.

Can I prevent monogenic diabetes?
At this time, monogenic diabetes can’t be prevented. However, researchers are working to find possible risk factors and ways to prevent the disease.

Clinical Trials for Monogenic Diabetes
NIDDK conducts and supports clinical trials in many diseases and conditions, including diabetes. The trials look to find new ways to prevent, detect, or treat disease and improve quality of life.

What are clinical trials for monogenic diabetes?
Clinical trials—and other types of clinical studies NIH external link—are part of medical research and involve people like you. When you volunteer to take part in a clinical study, you help doctors and researchers learn more about disease and improve health care for people in the future.

Researchers are studying different aspects of monogenic diabetes, such as ways to improve diagnosis.

Find out if clinical studies are right for you NIH external link.

Watch a video of NIDDK Director Dr. Griffin P. Rodgers explaining the importance of participating in clinical trials.


What clinical studies for monogenic diabetes are looking for participants?
You can find clinical studies on monogenic diabetes at ClinicalTrials.gov NIH external link. In addition to searching for federally funded studies, you can expand or narrow your search to include clinical studies from industry, universities, and individuals; however, the National Institutes of Health does not review these studies and cannot ensure they are safe for you. Always talk with your primary health care professional before you participate in a clinical study.

What have we learned about monogenic diabetes from NIDDK-funded research?
NIDDK has supported many research projects to learn more about monogenic diabetes

Progress in Diabetes Genetics in Youth (ProDiGY). This study evaluated how common MODY was among multiethnic youth who had a diagnosis of type 2 diabetes. The study found that 2.8% of the participants had MODY.7
a study with 160 participants showed that people with monogenic diabetes can also have obesity or overweight. They can also have antibodies that are seen in type 1 diabetes.
Monogenic Diabetes Registry. This database was created in 2008 to collect data related to diagnosis, treatment, and natural history of people with monogenic diabetes.
References
[1] Salguero MV, Arosemena M, Pollin T, et al. Monogenic forms of diabetes. In: Lawrence JM, Casagrande SS, Herman WH, Wexler DJ, Cefalu WT, eds. Diabetes in America. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK); December 20, 2023.

[2] Beltrand J, Busiah K, Vaivre-Douret L, et al. Neonatal diabetes mellitus. Frontiers in Pediatrics. 2020;8:540718. doi:10.3389/fped.2020.540718

[3] Blonde L, Umpierrez GE, Reddy SS, et al. American Association of Clinical Endocrinology clinical practice guideline: developing a diabetes mellitus comprehensive care plan—2022 update. Endocrine Practice. 2022;28(10):923–1049. doi:10.1016/j.eprac.2022.08.002

[4] Zhang H, Colclough K, Gloyn AL, Pollin TI. Monogenic diabetes: a gateway to precision medicine in diabetes. Journal of Clinical Investigation. 2021;131(3):e142244. doi:10.1172/JCI142244

[5] ElSayed NA, Aleppo G, Aroda VR, et al. 2. Classification and diagnosis of diabetes: standards of care in diabetes—2023. Diabetes Care. 2023;46(suppl 1):S19–S40. doi:10.2337/dc23-S002

[6] Kant R, Davis A, Verma V. Maturity-onset diabetes of the young: rapid evidence review. American Family Physician. 2022;105(2):162–167.

[7] Todd JN, Kleinberger JW, Zhang H, et al. Monogenic diabetes in youth with presumed type 2 diabetes: results from the Progress in Diabetes Genetics in Youth (ProDiGY) collaboration. Diabetes Care. 2021;44(10):2312–2319. doi:10.2337/dc21-0491. Alcohol Consumption
Personal Habits

How often do you consume alcohol?

What types of alcohol do you usually drink?

On average, how many drinks do you have in one sitting?

Social Context

Do you prefer drinking alone or with others?

How often do you drink in social settings, such as parties or gatherings?

Have you ever felt pressured by friends or family to drink alcohol?

Health Impact

Have you experienced any negative health effects from drinking alcohol?

Are you aware of the recommended guidelines for safe alcohol consumption?

Have you ever sought medical advice regarding your alcohol consumption?

Behavioral Patterns

Do you notice a pattern in your drinking habits, such as drinking more during weekends or stressful times?

Have you ever tried to cut down on your drinking? If so, what was your experience?

Have you ever had any legal or personal problems due to alcohol consumption?

Smoking
Personal Habits

How often do you smoke?

What types of tobacco products do you use?

At what age did you start smoking?

Social Context

Do you smoke alone or with others?

How often do you smoke in social settings, such as parties or gatherings?

Have you ever felt pressured by friends or family to smoke?

Health Impact

Have you experienced any negative health effects from smoking?

Are you aware of the health risks associated with smoking?

Have you ever sought medical advice regarding your smoking habits?

Behavioral Patterns

Do you notice a pattern in your smoking habits, such as smoking more during stressful times?

Have you ever tried to quit smoking? If so, what was your experience?

Have you ever had any legal or personal problems d
